 C. Abolitionists continued to argue against slavery itself. The Anti-Slavery Society, founded in 1823, intensified its  parliamentary agitation under the leadership of Thomas Fowell Buxton.
 C. Industrialization gave new prominence to religious nonconformists and to advocates of the new evangelicalism.  Their influence led to the abolition of slavery and the dispatch of missionaries to overseas colonies.
 H. The Protestant Church of Ireland was a standing grievance to the Catholic people, who had to pay for its upkeep.  1. The Catholic Association, founded by Daniel O’Connell in 1823, campaigned for Catholic emancipation.  2. Catholic Emancipation in 1829 gave Catholic property owners the right to become members of Parliament.  3. Not until 1869 was the Church of Ireland disestablished.
 prison colony: A colony founded as a place to which criminals could be sent out of England (first Georgia, later Australia).
 the French presence in Algeria, which, in contrast, was seen in France as part of  metropolitan France and not as a colony, or to support the Portuguese position  in Goa, which was seized by India in 1961.
 From the perspective of many groups, empires such as those ruled by the  Ottomans, Habsburgs (Austria), and Britain, could be more benign than the  ethnically based nation-states that succeeded them. Not all empires were benign  to minority ethnic groups, but many were. The British concept of imperial  civilisation included religious tolerance (up to a point) and ethnic diversity. In  addition, Britain eventually sought to end formal enslavement in its empire (and  elsewhere), although the labour situation continued to be grossly inegalitarian  on an ethnic basis in the colonies, and even more so than in the metropole.
 At the same time, there was in England a degree of public, national  engagement with territorial expansion. The development of a public politics in  England ensured that policymaking was not simply a case of the Crown but,  instead, from the early thirteenth century, involved the ‘community of the  realm’, an entity that was to be represented in parliament. As a result, what would  later be termed the public sphere played a role in the discussion of policy, both  directly and, via the impact on the raising of resources, notably troops and taxes,  indirectly. A similar process occurred in Ireland, where the conflicts played out  in the Dublin parliament, England’s first colonial legislature, helped crystallise  a distinctive colonial identity.7 However, the extent to which English public  opinion supported the longlasting intervention in France, which became more  insistent once the Hundred Years’ War had broken out in the 1330s, is unclear.
 7 P. Crooks, ‘Representation and Dissent: “Parliamentarianism” and the Structure  of Politics in Colonial Ireland, c.1370–1420’, English Historical Review, 125 (2010), p. 34.
 The Development of Trans-Oceanic Imperialism In Reformation England, not only was the monarch now head of the Church,  but the Church was now depicted as representative of a chosen people with a  sense of divine mandate. Protestant England was presented as God’s New Israel,  a Protestant people and state, with all the possibilities that this depiction entailed  of defining purposes and identities separate to those of the rest of Christendom.  Cultural nationalism became stronger as a result of the Reformation, not least  the embrace of the English language and a greater commitment to Englishness.11
 Moreover, the challenge to authority represented by the Reformation was  to help lead to a view of the world in which it was easier to respond to new  information without being constrained by existing patterns of authority. This  situation looked towards the prominent English role in the Scientific Revolution  of the late seventeenth century.
 This idea of Britishness proved particularly attractive to those who stressed  a militant Protestant identity in the midst of a hostile Catholic world. At the  same time, the complex and shifting relationships between Britain, England,  Scotland, and Ireland indicated the compromises and nuances that were to  characterise much of the subsequent history of the British empire. James’ hopes  of a ‘union of love’ or, at least, a measure of administrative and economic union  between England and Scotland, were not realised, and separate parliamentary,  ecclesiastical, and legal systems continued. There were fears in England about  the legal and constitutional implications of any union, and the Westminster  parliament rejected a parliamentary or legal bond with Scotland.
 The settlers sought to create a godly agrarian world, and they believed that  their righteousness made them more entitled to the land than the natives;  although it was not only Protestant nonconformist settlers who saw natives as  savages.20 The settlers benefited from the impact on the natives of (probably) the  plague in 1616–18 and of smallpox in 1634. The effects of disease were highly  significant for the contours, and indeed character, of colonial settlement, both  in creating opportunities and in thwarting others. The separatists were followed  to New England by settlers who were not separatists, but who were also zealous  for a godly commonwealth. These more mainstream Protestants, sponsored by  the Massachusetts Bay Company established in 1629, founded Boston in 1630.
 These colonies remained closely focused on England. An emphasis on  spreading settlement can lead to an underrating of the major role of ports in  the colonies, especially of Boston, and, more particularly, the importance of  the beginning of the annual sailing season and the arrival of ships that brought  immigrants, products, money, and news from England. Their likely arrival was  the focus of continual discussion and concern in the colonies.
 of imperialism involved both the issue of commitment and, as a consequence,  political contention.
 The limited role of the Crown in supporting trans-oceanic activity helped  lessen the impact on Britain’s overseas position of the civil wars in Scotland,  Ireland, and England that broke out in 1639 lasting until 1652. However, this  impact was still serious. Moreover, the challenge to established assumptions  about the conduct of government posed both by Charles I, and by some of his  critics, manifested itself in the colonies as well as in the British Isles. In 1638,  Massachusetts refused an order to submit its charter for scrutiny and slighted  the condemnation of the charter by the Privy Council. Charles was considering  a forceful response when the crisis of authority in Scotland gathered pace.  Within New England, there were also tensions over authority, with Connecticut  and Rhode Island being founded as breakaway settlements from Massachusetts  in response to differences over church government. Eventual parliamentary  success in the civil wars, however, ensured that the empire held together; and  this uniformity in outcome was continued during the subsequent turmoil of the  seventeenth century.
 Thus, New England, with its Puritanism, urban character, and (albeit  limited) democratic practices, in part drew on different traditions to the  more Episcopalian, rural, and hierarchical society that was established round  the Chesapeake. To understand both, it is necessary to appreciate the varied  character of English social development. In the case of seventeenth-century  Maryland and Virginia, both of which then focused on the Chesapeake, most  settlers were English by birth and upbringing, they established a society based  on English laws, government, and economic organisation, and they brought  traditional English attitudes towards the social order and religious practices.  However, in the case of the Chesapeake, immigration from England greatly  slackened from the 1690s, and social contrasts became more marked. This  development was linked to a demographic shift in which, thanks to a decline in  death rates, the percentage of native-born inhabitants rose. This led to a better  balance of men and women, early marriages, and thus more children. A greater  separateness from England emerged.48 Colonies settled later, notably, from the  1730s, Georgia and, from the 1760s (East and West) Florida, did not have time  to experience the same change to the same degree.
 the Crown over the governments of Barbados and Massachusetts was increased,  while, in 1677–79, abortive plans were drafted to make legislation in Virginia  and Jamaica dependent on the assent of parliament. From his accession in 1685,  James II of England and VII of Scotland’s attempt to impose autocracy clashed,  in both Britain and the colonies, with the corporate ideal of government, as  well as with a Protestant suspicion of the intentions of the Catholic monarch  whatever his claims to grant religious toleration. He was also brought down by  his maladroit handling of people. Circumstances worked against James: he was  unable to mould them or to respond adequately.
 The ‘Glorious Revolution’ was followed, in both England and the colonies,  by the implementation of a new order that included a measure of religious  toleration as well as an extension of government based on the Westminster  parliament; Ireland and Scotland still had their separate parliaments. This  extension was seen with the revised Navigation Act of 1696, that authorised  colonial Vice-Admiralty courts, and with the creation in 1700 of a General  Post Office that had branches in the colonies. Furthermore, the spread of a  measure of religious toleration (markedly so in contrast with the French and  Spanish empires) led to pressure on colonial assemblies to copy the Toleration  Act of 1689. This toleration also led to the Naturalization Act of 1740,  which offered to foreign Protestants and Jews in the colonies the rights of  British subjects.
 Similarly, there was a religious dimension to the American War of  Independence (1775–83), with Nonconformists more prone to oppose  George III, while Episcopalians were more likely to back him; although there  was no automatic relationship in either case. More generally, the religious  dimension joined empire at home to the situation abroad, with hostility to  Catholicism providing a key element in opposition to France and Spain. Linda  Colley’s perceptive account, in Britons: Forging the Nation 1707–1837 (1992),  of the role of Protestantism in British national identity, by extension covers the  empire. Religious concerns help explain not only the logic of empire but also the  artificiality of treating it separately to domestic and foreign policies. Missionary  activity was a product of this aspect of empire and one that linked congregations  in Britain to an exalted sense of imperial purpose.6
 were particularly tolerant of religious groups outside the Established  Churches, although the position in individual colonies varied: in Virginia,  in 1643, Puritan nonconformity was banned, whereas, six years later, Lord  Baltimore, the Catholic proprietor of Maryland, had the Assembly enact a law  of toleration.
 Imperial Missions Missionary activity was an important aspect of British commitment to the  trans-oceanic world, and most, although not all, of this activity focused on the  empire. The long-established Societies for Promotion of Christian Knowledge  (founded in 1698), and for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts  (1701), were joined by the Baptist Missionary Society (1792), the London  Missionary Society (1795), the Anglican Church Missionary Society (1795),  the Scottish Missionary Society (1799), the Society for Missions to Africa  and the East (1799; from 1812 the Church Missionary Society), and the  Wesleyan Missionary Society (1813). The British and Foreign Bible Society,  established in 1804, spread the word in another way. From the 1860s, female  missionaries became important, while the role of nuns ensured that women were  always highly significant for the Catholic presence.20 The separate missionary  societies indicated the extent to which empire was a sphere for competitive  proselytisation. The Church of England would not even co-operate with the  Scottish Episcopal Church in India in the early nineteenth century. Moreover,  a stress on Protestantism continued the theme of rivalry with Catholicism.  Nevertheless, Catholicism appeared a less present threat after Britain’s victories  in the Napoleonic Wars. The ending of legal disabilities for Nonconformists  and Catholics was highly significant for this partial reconceptualisation of  the religious character of the British empire. The emphasis was on a Christian  presence and ethos, rather than simply a Protestant one.
 22 S. Neylan, The Heavens are Changing: Nineteenth-Century Protestant Missions  and Tsimshian Christianity (Montreal, 2003).
 exploitation. Eventual independence was defined in terms of the establishment  of a Westminster parliamentary democracy.
 In practice, this approach represented a serious failure to appreciate the  situation in 1706–07. The Union was an English move to extend the Act of  Settlement to Scotland and to end the threat posed by the Scottish parliament’s  capacity for separate legislation, notably the 1705 Act allowing Scotland to  choose a successor to the Scottish Crown. Although the passage of the Act of  Union through the Scottish Parliament in 1706 in part depended on successful  political management as well as corruption, there were also important issues  of self-interest. The Scottish economy was in a very poor state, there was a  determination not to be shut out from English and colonial markets, the  bitter civil war of 1689–91 had underlined the difficulty of independence  from England, and the powerful leadership of the Presbyterian Church, whose  privileged position in a seriously divided Scotland was written into the treaty,  accepted the Union as a political necessity because there was no good Protestant  alternative. The refusal of the exiled Stuarts to convert to Protestantism gravely  lessened Scottish options.
 racial dimension  126, 128–9, 130, 150, 164 racialism  6 radio  162 railways  161 rebellions  68–9 Reformation  12–13, 40–41, 43–4 Relief of Lucknow, The (film)  174 religious dimension  15, 61, 68, 84, 86–7, 188, 238 Catholics  42–3, 48, 96, 108, 122, 124, 232 divine support  14, 16, 51
 Ballantyne argues that the development of Aryanism as a racial ideology on the New Zealand frontier in the nineteenth century was the product of a multiplicity of transnational connections between colonial South Asia and the Pacific. Several constellations of imperial networks were par- ticularly crucial, including an emergent imperial newspaper and print culture that connected the colony to the wider world of empire, and the establishment of learned institutions, such as Theosophy and the Poly- nesian Society, which had strong and direct connections to India. But perhaps most important were well-developed migration networks that linked India and New Zealand, including a large cluster of colonial sur- veyors and foresters, who began their careers in the service of the East India Company (and later, the Government of India) before transferring to New Zealand. ‘Thus’, writes Ballantyne, ‘two elite cliques of experi- enced India hands played a pivotal role in state-sponsored colonial science and were at the forefront of the colonial project to map and demarcate land and to police its effective use’.52
 The goal of improvement and its linkage with science formed, then, a part of the mentality of the British elite in the formative period of its empire. Turning such goals into a programmatic strategy for the advance- ment of knowledge within the imperial setting required, however, a com- mitment on the part of the British state which was slow to be realized. Francis Bacon had tried in vain to interest James I in his plans for the reform of learning and many of his successors and their administrations were equally slow in embracing the view that the state should serve as a patron of scientific progress. British government had long been based on the view that the state should limit its functions as much as possible, leaving much of the day to day administration to be carried on at the local level through the voluntary service of a landowning class which accepted the need to act as Justices of the Peace and other such func- tionaries as a just return for their social position. In science, too, vol- untary service was seen as the natural way to proceed – a message underlined by the fact that at its foundation the Royal Society in 1660 received no more than a royal title and a mace from Charles II.
 Elsewhere in the British Empire, too, science formed an important part of the elite culture and its cultivation was both a mark of gentility and an espousal of the goals of improvement which formed an important part of the justification of empire.51 The growth of local scientific societies was one index of the increasing local consolidation of colonial elites. Such local scientific bodies provided an opportunity for rational amuse- ment, social and political networking and, it was hoped, the promotion of the goals of improvement. Accordingly, particular emphasis was placed on the study of possible sources of improved economic well-being – one of the major goals espoused by Jones in his presidential address on the importance of Indian science. When, for example, the Van Diemen’s Land Scientific Society was founded in 1829, it was ‘constituted … in  imitation of the Royal & other literary & scientific societies of Europe & India’, and it took as one of its major goals the ‘eliciting and discovering the properties and uses to which the vegetable productions of the island may be applied and to ascertain the improvements which may be adopted in their cultivation’.52 Its successor body, the grandly named, The Royal Society of Van Diemen’s Land for Botany, Horticulture and the Advance- ment of Body (founded in 1843 as the first Royal Society outside Britain) urged its members to promote ‘the advance of Science and the progress of the Colony’.53
 This is not to argue that ‘science’, or ‘scientists’ did not exist in Aus- tralia before the wave of exhibitions starting in the 1860s and reaching their apex two decades later by the time of the Melbourne Centennial International in 1888. That earlier history provided a foundation for science and scientists at the exhibitions, including an existing public pres- ence and at least some public authority. As noted above, scientific dis- plays alone were popular at the first two metropolitan exhibitions held in Sydney and Melbourne in 1854, primarily as a way to collect Australian exhibits for the Paris Universal Exposition one year later. Such exhibits and the participation of colonial scientists drew upon general scientific interest in the colonies. The practice of science itself was part of settle- ment from the very first British generations in the forms of mapping, mineralogy, botanical gardens, natural history, and other practical exer- cises.42 Scientific enterprise of this kind benefited from the pattern of colonial state intervention in public affairs, a precedent established dur- ing the early years of official colonization in New South Wales and Vic- toria, and consented to by even the most ‘conservative’ pastoralists and politicians.43 Scientific societies pursuing ambitious projects inevitably developed a close relationship with local, or colonial governments, such as those in the city of Melbourne and the colony of Victoria. Since many Australian politicians were active in these philosophical and scientific societies and Colonial Governors served as patrons, it is not surprising that requests for official assistance were often fulfilled, if offers them- selves were not forthcoming.44
 The institutional foundations and networks were clearly present in the young colonies of the Australian continent. Key scientists were active in public institutions, voluntary societies, perhaps even commercial life, their various positions and roles often connected and mutually reinforc- ing. Officers and staff of the major scientific collections were also major players at the exhibitions. In this way, colonial public life mirrored to a great degree English developments. John Stuart Mill noted in 1836 that England ‘is covered with associations’, or ‘societies’, including those  for political, religious, philanthropic, and scientific purposes.45 Notable among such societies were the British Association for the Advancement of Science and the provincial Mechanics’ Institutes. By mid-century, similar associations were found throughout at least eastern Australia, where  agricultural societies and mechanics’ institutes provided the Antipodean reflection of the metropole’s mid Victorian institutional image. As was the case with their British brethren, such associations in Australia offered lectures, journals, museums, libraries, and art and industrial expositions, creating the sinews of nineteenth-century local, civic, colonial and inter- colonial, or national culture, both artistic and scientific.46
 Scientists were anxious about their place in colonial society, seized by a sense of impermanence and disregard, or homelessness in all of its mean- ings. Reverend W.B. Clarke addressed such concerns in his ‘Anniversary Address’ to the Royal Society of New South Wales in 1875 amid the flurry of exhibitions in the Australian colonies, Britain, and Europe.63 Clarke was perhaps the most well-known and active geologist in the colony,  if not throughout Australasia, and his public scientific life included organ- izing exhibits, writing essays, and serving as commissioner for Australian exhibitions starting with the first Sydney Metropolitan show in 1854.
 To those ends, significant and enduring connections with other learned societies in New South Wales, across the borders in the other Australian colonies, and abroad should be pursued. The Royal Society needed to be part of the various networks potentially connecting it and its members to a wider world, both at home in its own colony and beyond the colony’s borders. Science and its public face, the Royal Society, might then become a permanent and well-funded institution, recognized as part of colonial society and generator, recipient, and representative of wider civic and national, if not imperial, interests. Science was seen as a vital connection creating and a vital metaphor representing the nation and society. It pro- vided not only a language comprehensible at home and abroad, but also the social, cultural, and intellectual authority necessary to justify public policies. Might not society and the nation work the way that science and scientists did?
 40 The Exposition of 1851; or Views of the Industry, the Science, and the Government of England, pp. 190–201.
 Postwar British imperialism, therefore, derived considerable practical and symbolic benefit from contact with the FAO. The Organization’s international mandate did not constitute a challenge to imperial gov- ernance per se. Indeed, the FAO accommodated the status quo of  international geopolitics through attributing to imperial powers the responsibility for colonial development. Yet despite these assurances, the FAO’s ties with colonial territories heightened governmental concerns over the sustainability of staffing late colonial administrations.
 The socio-cognitive networks of CFS members, therefore, unsettled the hierarchical channels of communication between the FAO and colonial administrations insisted upon by the Colonial Office. Neither colonial governments nor the Colonial Office itself could prevent CFS personnel from utilizing networks as a means of facilitating their trans- fer to an international civil service, despite guidelines and financial penalties for breaking contracts. The final section of this chapter draws together the various mechanisms underpinning the transfer of CFS per- sonnel to FAO employment discussed above. It offers a microlevel per- spective on the reconfiguration of career networks through the insights of practitioners involved, focusing on the two most formative modes of contact between the FAO and CFS personnel, namely FAO technical assistance projects and forestry conferences.
 Conclusion: legacy The socio-cognitive networks forged through interaction between  CFS members and FAO staff in the late colonial period jarred with the Colonial Office’s desire to delimit the flow of networks of personal connection that traversed imperial space. FAO assistance to British crown colonies simultaneously helped strengthen the ‘Second Colonial Occu- pation’ and generated fears of its demise. In an era of progressive decolon- ization, global shortages of natural resource specialists resulted in the career trajectories of colonial scientists becoming highly politicized. Yet while colonial bureaucrats railed against the FAO for the potentially cor- rosive impact of their recruitment networks on the staffing of colonial administrations, the lived experiences of rank and file practitioners who personally negotiated the material realities of late imperialism elicit the extent to which serving officers initiated extra-imperial communications. The flow of colonial foresters into FAO employment would only increase with constitutional change. Yet – with Whitehall accusations of the  FAO ‘poaching’ serving personnel resurfacing in the UK’s bilateral aid program – the end of formal empire was by no means the end of the inter-institutional frictions generated by recruitment. Continued short- ages in the availability of natural resource specialists did nothing to alle- viate these tensions.78 Where once, FAO recruitment practice had played upon Colonial Office anxieties of imperial decline, it continued to serve well into the late 1960s as an index of Britain’s waning international political influence.
 Counterfactuals are, of course, impossible to prove. One cannot assert, for instance, with any degree of certitude, events that did not in fact occur, nor name that centralizing figure who might have been India’s Bismarck, Mazzini, Atatürk or Garibaldi in the absence of the British. But historical events find their own dramatis personae, and it is unreasonable to suggest that what happened everywhere else would not have happened in India. From such an initially hybrid system could have emerged a modern constitutional monarchy and political institutions built upon the Mughal administrative system, as modified by the Marathas. But these are hypotheticals. The British came, and no such non-colonial India emerged.
 Part of the problem was that the Indian social structures were unfamiliar to the British, whose own villages survived in a largely feudalistic relationship to their landlords. Empire was in many ways the vehicle for the extension of British social structures to the colonies they conquered. The socio-political constructs that the British made in their Empire were primarily reflections of the traditional, individualistic, unequal and still class-ridden society that existed in England. The architects of Empire, responding to what they knew, sought to recreate the rural arcadia of Tory England, where local government since the sixteenth century had been controlled by those with high social prestige and ruled by an established squirearchy. Instead of the autonomous village governments the British dismantled in India, English villages were in the hands of the traditional lords, the grandees being supplemented by gentry attached to them. The English tried to find similar structures in the traditional societies of their colonies, and when they could not, they invented an approximation of them. Thus was born the ‘indirect rule’ system of government that characterized much of the Empire, with power devolved to an entire hierarchy of greater and lesser imitation ‘gentlemen’, many given British-invented titles like ‘Rai Bahadur’ or even knighted (and, in a couple of cases, ennobled) for their pains. This was both less expensive for the Empire and, as with the English system at home, it was run by complicit amateurs, so there was no need to create a professional class of Indians who would wield, and then seek to exercise, political authority.
 Yes, it brought in a supposedly free press, but ensured it operated under severe constraints, and planted the seeds of representative parliamentary institutions while withholding the substance of power from Indians.
 form of civil society, 124
 It would be a simple thing to consign both Eden and Hacket’s publication  of Ribaut’s voyage solely to their desire to see England establish an overseas  empire. This is, in fact, the larger object Eden has in mind, as his dedicatory  epistle and letter to the reader make plain, and this is the reading of his work  that has attracted the most scholarly attention.11 Given all this, Eden’s decision  to cite the Spanish example is not surprising. The First Three English Books ap- peared at the time of the marriage of Mary Tudor—a Catholic who had con- troversially reversed the Protestant reforms of Henry VIII and Edward VI— to Philip II of Spain, and the possibilities of emulation and cooperation were  not lost on Eden. Similarly, Hacket operated within the growing world of  Elizabethan publishing that produced many tracts, essays, and books concerned  with colonization and empire.12 Yet there is more happening in these texts than the mere notion of developing a powerful and wealthy national enterprise. De- spite the fierce doctrinal differences between  Protestants—be it members of  the Church of England or dissenters like the Puritans or  Huguenots—and Ro- man Catholics, their worldviews were remarkably similar. The Iberians, in  keeping with a largely medieval, millenarian theological grid, saw the New  World as possessing both Edenic and satanic qualities, while the English and  their French Calvinist religious allies imagined their worlds along similar  lines. As Jorge Cañizares- Esguerra puts it, “British Protestants and Spanish  Catholics deployed similar religious discourses to explain and justify conquest  and colonization.” In the same vein, they also constructed a vision of the New  World landscape within those convergent religious boundaries.13
 114  .    Frisinnede Venstre  (literally Liberal Left, but center-right on the political spec- trum) was led in the early 1930s by Christensen’s old friend, A. W. Brøgger.  Oddvar Høidal has characterized  Frisinnede Venstre’s  members as believing  that they constituted “an elite group, a natural born aristocracy” and has  linked this patrician belief to the role many of its members played in the  Fatherland League’s foundation. Høidal,  Quisling , 55–56.
 Respect for the personal status of the various peoples and communities and for their religious interests shall be fully guaranteed. In particular, the control and administration of Wakfs shall be exercised in accordance with religious law and the dispositions of the founders.
 According to Gilroy, Britain’s history of colonial expansion and its subju- gation of weaker nations has not only derailed a doctrine of multicultural- ism but has contributed to the success of an American-led ‘unipolar global  order’ (p. 3), which sustains the global structure of imperialism.
 This same Arnoldian-Leavisite tradition infl uences the novels of colo- nial servants and settlers who returned to England from the colonies dur- ing the period of extensive decolonization. Throughout his career, Greene  remained in self-exile from Britain and set his novels from the late-1950s  and early-1960s— Our Man in Havana  (1958) and  A Burnt out Case   (1960)—in Cuba and the Belgian Congo.  23   Burgess, on the other hand,  returned to England and, although he was to leave again in 1968, pro- duced a number of novels that responded to the immediate impact of  decolonization on British culture and society.
 9.    As Chair of English at Birmingham University, Hoggart estab- lished the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (CCCS) in  1964. David Alderson notes that the CCCS was ‘the fi rst of its  kind, though subsequently there were to be numerous university  centres in related fi elds’ ( 2002 , p. 713). The CCCS was closed in  2002 following a restructuring of departments at Birmingham  University (see Curtis,  2002 ).
 This study argues that the British empire from 1780 to 1830  (and in some areas beyond)' represented not simply a hiatus between  the irresistible waves of liberal reform, but a series of attempts to  establish overseas despotisms which mirrored in many ways the  politics of neo-absolutism and the Holy Alliance of contemporary  Europe. These colonial despotisms were characterised by a form of  aristocratic military government supporting a viceregal autocracy, r  by a well-developed imperial style which emphasised hierarchy  and racial subordination, and by the . patronage of indigenous  landed elites. Of course, constitution-making for the dependencies  remained evolutionary and pragmatic; it rarely aspired to uniform- ity (Madden 1987: xxxiv-v). However, in the British tradition at  least, the formal statements of constitutions or colonial minutes  are a poor guide to real social and political change; there are  distinct limitations to history based on what men tell their lawyers  they are doing. If we consider the ideas which informed political  arrangements, the style and direction of policies and the social  context in which they operated, the argument for continuity  seems inappropriate. The era between American Independence  and the Great Reform Bill does indeed warrant its description  as a 'Second British Empire'. Similarly, the decline of this new  style of imperialism after 1830 had as much to do with indigenous  resistance and international economic crisis as with the triumph of  liberalism at home.
 The imperial dimension of the British state was equally important  in Ireland where between 1780 and 1830 an attempt was made to  modernise and purge the Protestant Ascendancy and assimilate the  Catholic gentry to a Greater Britain. But historical writing has been  straitjacketed by the 'English' and 'nationalist' views of Irish history.  English historiography tends to see Ireland as a 'problem' to be  solved by constitutional artangements such as the Act of Union of  1801. The extent to which Ireland was the colonial society where  the mechanics and ideology ofimperial rule were first implemented,  has often been glossed over. At the same time, nationalist historical  writing unduly neglects the critical role of the Irish within British  imperial expansion and equates nationalism with anti-imperialism.  This is an anachronism. Irish patriots were desperate to reap the  benefits of imperial expansion while Irish soldiers and savants were  in the front line of empire-building. In short, Irish nationalism arose  from Ireland's perceived exclusion from empire, not her inclusion  within it.
 INVERTED PATRIOTISM: THE CASE OF SCOTLAND Wales, the first English colony, had been shackled to London  since the Act of Union of 1536. In the eighteenth century its  thoughtlessly Anglocentric and Protestant elite filtered through  Oxford into London society Uones 1984: 46-50), while English  tradesmen and factors fanned out across the valleys. The incorpo- ration of Scotland and Ireland into this 'British Empire in Europe'  proceeded along similar paths. However, it was much more violent  and contentious, driven by fear of revolt from below as much as by  the desire for profit and status. The timing was also different. The  Scottish elite had already thrown in its lot with London in 1707; the  revolts of 1715 and 1745 confirmed their assimilation. The Irish  Protestants were to haver until the end of the century when they  were blown into legislative Union with Great Britain by Catholic  peasant revolt. Thus the consolidation of an imperial state both  inside and outside Europe depended on these three conditions: the  distribution of benefits from economic integration; the intensity of  revolt 'from below'; and the imminence of an external threat.
 Parochial economic and social conflicts arising from rapid  growth and a change in the nature of the economy during  the great upswing after 1730 provided one set of conditions for  relations between the Irish ruling class and the British empire.  Another dimension, however, was added by the constitutional and  political relations between the Irish elite and London. Up to 1790,  and most particularly during the period of 1782-4 when the Irish  volunteer movement was at its height, this establishment seemed  set to follow a path similar to that of the American colonists.  British control over the Irish Parliament (enshrined in Poyning's  Law of 1494) was deeply resented, particularly since Ireland was  restricted from full participation in the British colonial system,  while still being expected to pay for imperial defence through excise and other taxes. On this the Protestant gentry and the  Catholic middle class (itself disadvantaged by exclusion from  office under anti-Catholic disabilities) were at one. The crisis of the  American War of Independence allowed the Irish elite to demand  from Britain parliamentary independence and various concessions  in trade .
 This Irish political community showed some signs of cultural  assimilation before 1790. Agrarianist philosophy and a desire for  the 'improvement' of the Catholic peasantry brought Anglican,  Presbyterian and crypto-Catholic together in the vigorous literary  and debating world of Dublin . In the 1760s and 1770s some  Catholic gentry took to the practice of occasional conformity with  Anglicanism to gain access to public office (MacDonagh 1984: 23).  In local government, again, some Catholic gentry were admitted  to shares of patronage , while both Protestant and Catholic sought  service in the army of the East India Company, one division of  the imperial forces where religious affiliation was regarded with  indifference . All the same, the assimilation of the Catholic middle  class, it soon proved , was too little and too late . Only 10 per cent of  the subscriptions to the Bank of Ireland stock in the 1780s was in  Catholic hands; some decades after it was made legal for Catholics  to own land, there were remarkably few large Catholic estates (Lord  Sheffield 1785: 373) .
 The imperial principle also won out with ease in Wales. During the  1780s the Principality had spawned many radical cells, led by men  such as the dissenting minister, Richard Price. They drew on the  poverty of rural Wales and resentment at the economic and political  dominance of the small group of Anglo-Welsh gentry; they also saw  Welsh neglect by Parliament as part of a much wider, imperial  problem. The outbreak of the French wars, however, signalled a  rapid decline of old Welsh radicalism. Methodism had been the  most vigorously expanding faith in Wales in the later eighteenth  century. The Methodist leadership, now under suspicion of '.jacobin'  tendencies, rallied smartly to the state, becoming 'plus royaliste que  le roi'. John Elias taught his followers that it was their duty to  submit to authority, while Charles of Bala wrote his Welsh Methodists  Vindicated to celebrate their loyalty (Davies and Edwards 1939: 165).  Like the Scottish tradition, the Welsh language and literature had  already become a scholarly bauble for English writers and poets,  and its moral centre was probably Oxford not Aberystwyth Oones  1984: 46--9). Hereafter, Welsh dissent and nationalism became the  preserve of small groups of radicals in the new manufacturing  towns, Welsh emigres to North America and isolated romantic  bards.
 The Crown had evidently to play an important role, especially  in the empire. The wider Burkean formulation of the 'glories  of the British constitution' was inappropriate where indigenous  peoples were to be denied their own 'constitutions', and besides,  Burke's conservatism had displayed a strong anti-imperialist face,  at least as regards the East India Company. The established Church  might also be an important resource for state- and empire-building  but, again, there were problems. The accommodation of Protestant  Dissenters and Catholics raised difficult issues in Europe, while  direct evangelisation of Asians and Africans was suspect because  it might create 'mongrel' Christian races whose loyalty to the  Crown would be in doubt. During the generation after 1790  an uneasy compromise was evolved. On the one hand, the  Anglican Church was projected more forcefully outside England,  but mainly among people of British descent and their dependents,  or among people who were already Christian. For non-Christians,  the role of the Church was to be a glorious, but distant exemplar of national piety . On the other hand, the establishment delicately  encouraged the 'nationalisation' of Methodism and the Dissenting  Churches, whose prominent members already sought respectability  and distance from the earlier stigma of radicalism.
 The Protestant empire was also reinforced by the 'governing race'  principle which emphasised the fitness of Britons to rule by virtue  of their 'moral independency' and their understanding of the rule  of law; an institutionalised and philosophical racism thus became  an increasingly important part of the project . What has been called  here 'agrarian patriotism' was an outward manifestation of the right  to rule, and one which provided a serviceable unifying theory which  threatened fewer vested interests than the encouragement of free  trade. The divisions and contradictions with the plural British state  could also be submerged in the very acts of war and empire-building  themselves. Empire thus became a necessary component of British  nationalism in a way that it had never been central to English  patriotism.
 llO Nationalist display and viceregal ritual also became more  common in the colonies. After 1800, many new 'Crowy-colonies'  were created. Conquered territories such as Java or,,-Ceylon were  not annexed to the East India Company where the British Crown  had an ambiguous status. In possessions both old and new, public  ritual was designed to elevate the role of the governor and the Crown  over the still recalcitrant creole elites. For this a serviceable model  existed in the pageantry of the Viceregal Lodge in Dublin with its  formal levees and investitures of the Order of St Patrick. These  Irish ceremonies gave dignity to the annual ladling out of honours  and had been invented by administrations in the 1760s and 1770s  fighting to get their measures through the Irish Parliament.
 Once again, Ireland provided an interesting model. The fears  and hatreds engendered by the Catholic and peasant revolts which  flared up between 1796 and 1798 culminated in the emergence  of Protestant Orange movements with their aggressive martial  displays. In contrast to this, the viceroyalty seemed a relatively  benevolent force to many Catholics. In 1798 Earl Fitzmaurice  as lieutenant-governor pressed, but failed to win, the case for  their full emancipation and enfranchisement. In the 1820s Lord  Wellesley, who himself married a Catholic, voiced public hostility  to extreme Protestant claims and urged full Catholic assimilation  into political life (Brynn 1978: 84). Viceregal ritual, especially the  St Patrick's Day celebrations, achieved a degree of popular Catholic  support in Dublin during the years of the nineteenth century. The  new patriotism quickly enshrined its heroes, so that by the end of  the war, Nelson and Wellington, both the subject of fierce early  criticism, stood beside the royal pedestal, along with other minor  luminaries such as Rodney, and Wellesley who had built up a  coterie among Anglo-Indians even while some in Parliament were  still trying to prosecute him for war-mongering.
 Alongside the closer definition of both the nation and its foes  went the call to discipline and respectability. One powerful source of  this opinion was the growth of evangelical attitudes among Anglican  churchmen and the gentry which will be discussed below. Yet the  closer association of patriotism and right conduct deserves attention  here. The king, the nobility and leading members of the hierarchy  such as Beilby Porteus, Bishop of London, associated degeneracy  and immorality with political radicalism and regicide. During the  1790s a great variety of movements for the reform of public morals,  the suppression of drunkenness and the preservation of the Sabbath  emerged in the capital, sponsored and often supported by ministers.  Painfully slowly, attempts to reform the older universities which  had begun to occur in the 1770s and 1780s now gathered pace.  Tutors began to push for a university-wide examination system  in Cambridge and in 1801 the first Senate House Examinations  were held. This, they hoped, would impose patriotic discipline  on a student body which was felt to be restive and dissatisfied.  Several of the Heads of Colleges who instituted this move had  close contacts with Pitt's ministry. One wrote that his aim was to  reinforce the prestige of Church and university and to teach the  young to 'resist and refute the metaphysical subtleties which have thrown half of the , nations of Europe into confusion' (Rothblatt  1974: 286).
 In other parts of the empire, the active role of the state was,  however, much more in evidence. In Ireland the ruling class was  too scattered and culturally remote from the populace especially  in the south, for anything like the English JP system to work. The  electorate was kept small by anti-Catholic laws and the poverty of  the population so that local bodies were inadequate to share in  the tasks of regulation and taxation discharged by their English  equivalents. The state had to take a more direct role, and one  which, in theory, stood above the interests of the great Protestant  landowning families, the brewers, maltsters and linen-masters. The  shock delivered to the Anglo-Irish ruling elite in the 1780s, there- fore, engendered a movement towards reform or, more precisely,  towards state regulation. Administrative 'reform', moreover, was a  more acceptable response to crisis than any dallying with political  reform which might have threatened the Protestant Ascendancy .  The career of Sir J. Fitzpatrick (MacDonagh 1984) was born out  of this new spirit. His public services began with the control and  regulation of Irish charter schools (1785-7) and the scandalous  Irish prison service (the Irish Prisons Amendment Act, 1787).  Later, Fitzpatrick's concern for Irish soldiers serving in the imperial  army embroiled him in a campaign for the reform of conditions of  service for soldiers in England, and eventually drew his attention to  the regulation of convict ships sailing from Portsmouth. While little  change occurred in the fragmented army bureaucracy, Fitzpatrick's  initiatives did coincide with a more general movement towards  regulation. The need for this was impressed on the ministry after  the usual failures at the beginning of the Revolutionary Wars. The  Transport Board was created by order-in-council in 1794. The Alien  Office, designed to control refugees and 'seditionists', took shape in  1793-4, while a national system of royal mails began to operate in  1792.
 The imperial dimension of this should be stressed. Fitzpatrick achieved his entree into English administration through the good  offices of Lord Moira, one of the strongest advocates of patriotic  union between Britain and Ireland (MacDonagh 1984: 154-5).  Several other specialists, most notably the young Castlereagh  (prime minister, 1808-18), also had their first taste ofinterventionist  administration while serving Dublin Castle in the reforming 1780s  and the troubled 1790s. Later the Moira connection was to prove  one of the most important channels of administrative talent to India  and the Cape of Good Hope. Fitzpatrick himself had sonie dealings  with the East India Company when he attempted to set in motion  moves for the regulation of their large and badly maintained fleet  in 1796 (ibid.: 242).
 Over and above the accountable district official, who inherited  an awesome sense of natural fitness to govern from gentry  exemplars of the past, stood the 'Board', a body of semi-specialist  administrators and political appointees. The last few years of the  century saw a proliferation of the numbers and function of  such administrative boards both in Britain and the colonies.  In India the great increas~ of official business connected with  the reorganisation of Indian land revenue after I 793 expanded  the role of executive overseeing bodies such as the Boards of  Revenue which stood between collectors and distant or preoccupied  governors. These inquisitorial and supervisory bodies were meant to guard the new autocratic district officials from peculation and  old perquisites which were coming to be seen as corrupt. They  were firmly subordinated to the now more powerful governors. In  Britain, such new concentrations of specialist expertise had greater  executive power. Thus the Colonial Office itself developed quite  rapidly out of the Board of War and Colonies under the influence ,  of Lord Bathurst and a number of taxation and colonial experts  such as William Huskisson whose careers ran parallel to those of  their peers at the newly professionalised Treasury (Madden 1987:  26-30).
 In Ireland the Anglican clergy were not in such a good position  to act as the eyes and the ears of the new state; they had too much  on hand getting in their tithes and preventing their hayricks being  burnt out. All the same, agrarianism was seen as the natural policy  for imperial consolidation. An Essay on the Present State of Manners  and Education among the Lower Class of the People of Ireland and of the  Means of Improving Them ( 1799) urged that an Agricultural Board  should take a leading role in both the improvement of Irish  agriculture and educating peasant children in 'active industry', as 'religious bigotry' derived from ignorance and idleness. Moreover,  the government should try to 'engage the cooperation of catholic  ministers' in providing information and leadership on the model  of the Scottish clergy who had 'zealously' helped Sir John Sinclair.  The notion of associating Catholic priests with an imperial project  would appear bizarre even a generation later .
 THE IMPERIAL ELITE AND GENTRY RESURGENCE Politicians were now unusually well connected among the secular  and ecclesiastical intelligentsia. The influence of Adam Smith was  extended through the medium of improvers such as Sinclair and  Arthur Young. Wilberforce, Hannah Moore, Grant, Shore and  other Evangelicals were close to Pitt himself. This relationship  bloomed during the campaign against the slave trade and it extend- ed to other issues including Irish and colonial government. Pitt was  also connected with Anglican moral reformers in the hierarchy,  notably Beilby Porteus, Bishop of London, and with reforming  heads of Oxford and Cambridge colleges. Dundas's coterie, which  included Scots intellectuals and imperial administrators such as Wellesley and Macartney, ramified into the early Colonial Office  under Bathurst. The collective mentality of this governing circle  was Anglican and anti-Jacobin. It was fired with a sharper sense of  British national and imperial mission. It represented a conservative  philosophical cabal, as influential as that of Milner, Curzon and  Baring a century later, during another period of 'new imperialism'.  In the earlier eighteenth century only the Elder Pitt's war ministry  had been anything like this, and even then had lacked its cohesion  and long-term influence.
 THE CHURCH MILITANT, RACE AND LAW The last chapter considered the changes in institutions within  the British elite which gave form to the Second British Empire.  Even if there was no 'Regency Revolution in Government' there  was a considerable extension of the role of the state and its arms  of coercion, and this was particularly true of the peripheries of the  'British Empire in ~urope'. However, there was a much sharper  discontinuity between the 'first' and 'second' empires in the realm of  ideas and attitudes. Racial superiority was now more firmly inscribed  in institutions. This was a change which predated by some years the  full impact of evangelical and utilitarian ideas in the 1820s and  1830s, or of the Indian Mutiny of 1857, which many historians  have seen as turning points in the emergence of British racism.  Two other elements were also important. First, there was a growth of evangelical ideas within the established churches (Anglican, Church  of Ireland and Scottish Presbyterian). Secondly, agrarian patriots  who had once been hostile to empire took their message abroad.  The dominant ideological character of this Second British Empire  was aristocratic, autocratic and agrarianist. By contrast, free trade  and early 'liberal' ideas were much more characteristic of what might  be called the 'Third' Empire which emerged in 1830s and after.
 These currents of ideas did not, of course, sweep all before  them. Nor were actors on the political stage uniformly affected  by them. Many evangelicals were suspicious of colonial conquest;  a few even felt that the institution of slavery could be made  morally acceptable. On the other hand, there were imperial  proconsuls such as Mountstuart Elphinstone who remained pure  eighteenth-century deists; or royalists like Thomas Maitland who  were sceptics and 'pagans' . Rather, what happened was that public  discourse was powerfully influenced by the more strident rhetoric  of well-organised proponents of the new 'moral majoritarianism'  (Hilton 1988). Again, the prescriptions of evangelical thinkers  for Britain and for her dependencies might differ considerably.  People whose commitment to an individualistic moral rearmament  in English society was closely connected with their advocacy of free  trade and a distrust of paternalism, could be found arguing that  in the colonies, or even in Ireland, 'the state of society' warranted  benevolent British intervention in the market and indigenous  customs. Thus divisions between 'liberal Tories' and 'high Tories',  between dissenting evangelicals and conservative Anglicans, which  bulked large in England, often dissolved in the colonial context. To  this extent, colonial projects helped reinforce a national consensus  at home.
 There was a myth propagated by liberal historians of empire  that religion played only a small role in the British imperialism  which was a pragmatic construction of hardy entrepreneurs and  agnostic statesmen. By contrast, religious zeal was characterisitic  of the Iberians and French overseas. Though direct missionary  activity or forced conversion was rare indeed among the British, the  spirit of the revived empire of the Napoleonic Wars was throughly  infused with a kind of Anglican providentialism which acted more  or less subtly on policy. This helps to explain that though Crown  and Company preached religious neutrality, indigenous people,  non-Protestants and non-Anglicans almost everywhere feared  religious assimilation. Their reactions ranged from Catholic  nationalism in Ireland through Calvinist separatism in southern Africa to the fear of 'frankish' or unclean influences which inspired  the Vellore Mutiny of the Madras army in 1806.
 The view that British overseas dominion was the creation  of an Anglican Providence had often been voiced before, even  in the Bengal of the 1770s when the secular values of the  Enlightenment seemed dominant . The classical fear that empire  necessarily corrupted civic virtue through luxury and decadence  was already on the wane by the 1770s (Marshall 1981). Following  the growth of Methodism and the trauma of the French Revolution,  the link between evangelical Protestantism, nationalism and empire  was forged more strongly. There was a change of philosophical  perspective. Some Old Dissenters and Rational Dissenters (such as  Unitarians) had drifted from allegiance to the British Crown during  the American War and had denounced patriotism. Anglican radicals  such as Wyvill had preached the cause of the Americans and reform.
 After 1790, Unitarianism rapidly declined. Anglicans, Baptists  and Presbyterians all vigorously attacked 'unpatriotic' dissenters  such as Richard Price. Whereas the religious form of philosophic  individualism had tended to downgrade 'the affections', including  affection towards nation, the younger generation drew upon the  philosopher Hartley who argued that 'the constitution of the  human mind requires family affections and patriotism as necessary  preconditions of general benevolence'. Writers such as Wilberforce  or full-blooded Anglicans such as Burke and Coleridge seemed to  suggest that religion was integrally patriotic. For Coleridge, indeed,  national and social discipline seemed more important for the reli- gious life than individual struggle, and 'national unity is secured by  the Church'. The importance of private, philosophical judgement  was never completely rejected, but moral seriousness, godliness and  patriotism seemed ever more closely aligned (Stafford 1982: 385).
 This was largely a reaction to the growth of Methodism, which  was only later intensified by fear of French Jacobinism . For many  among the gentry and wealthier merchant class, Methodism was a  'state within a state', It was a sect which propagated itself by the  manipulation of family ties of affection, and one which might  undermine both the established Church and the Constitution.  This was because loyalty to country was essentially an extension  of affection to family. From this perspective, Wesley had become  almost a 'Romish Saint', while Methodists were now 'a distinct people  in the Empire, having their peculiar laws and manners, a hierarchy,  a costume, even a physiognomy of their own' (QR: 4, 1810, 480). So  a new Anglican patriotism had to be called into being because the legitimacy of the Church and the definition of nation as a religious  community was being contested in England for the first time since  the end of the Catholic challenge of the Pretenders in 1745.
 When the Methodists formally seceded from the Church  of England ( 1795) and spawned yet more advanced religious  opinions, concern about them grew. Their success in attracting  lower middle-class and labouring people, particularly in regions  distant from London, was also a source of suspicion for a ruling  class increasingly worried about popular unrest. The Methodists'  outwardly conservative political stance did not fully allay such fears.  Yet the first reaction from within the ruling class, the evangelical  movement, was almost as suspect as the Methodists in the eyes of  many Anglicans. Of course, Wilberforce's attempts to establish a  public godliness and sobriety, trumpeted in his A practical view of the  prevailing religious system of professed Christians in the higher and middle  cwsses of the country contrasted with real Christianity ( 1798), ran parallel  to the emerging orthodox Anglican movement which associated  ungodly living with political radicalism. Like them, Wilberforce  stressed the 'corruption of human nature' as contrasted with the  Enlightenment philosophers, and he bewailed the spread of vice  especially among the middle classes of the cities (Wilberforce 1798:  385). Like them, he also lauded 'the tendency of religion, and  especially of Christianity to promote the well-being of political  communities' (ibid.: 35). The problem was that the attitude of  Wilberforce and the Anglican evangelicals to the Church hierarchy  was ambiguous. Some Anglicans saw among them a dangerous sect,  another implicit challenge to the authority of priest and bishop.  What was needed, therefore, was a militant revival within the  Anglican communion, but one directed by bishops who were to be  the leading edge of an imperial moral rearmament. For this type  of Anglican, reform of the lower classes and the moral salvation of  the colonies were closely equated. They represented a break with  the eighteenth-century tradition of decentralised lay Anglicanism  which had seen the wider empire as little more than a bin-end of  ecclesiastical patronage.
 A key figure in the revitalisation movement within the Anglican  establishment was Beilby Porteus, a native of New England, who  was Bishop of London from 1786 to 1811. Porteus's support for the  relief of the political disabilities of Dissenters and Roman Catholics  brought him near to the position of Pitt, Wellesley and Dundas, who  favoured a policy of imperial 'assimilation'. Not all Methodists or  Anglican evangelicals were as tolerant of Catholicism. Porteus and his acolytes also favoured a moral revival within English society.  He opposed Sunday political debating societies which sprang up  in the 1780s and was struck by 'the increasing profligacy of the  times' (Hodgson 1821: i, 92). He was also active in the 'Society  for Enforcing the King's Proclamation against Immorality and  Profaneness'. Later some of his friends helped promote the  movement for a national educational system espousing Anglican  values (the National Society for Promoting the Education of the  Poor in the Principles of the Anglican Church).
 The emphasis in all these bodies was less on individual  redemption than on social control. London must be the crucible  of change because this was where the 'emissaries of infidelity were  most actively occupied in their work of mischief. Moral change  would come about not through sects and holy cabals but through  the reorganisation and centralisation of the Church itself. Porteus  attempted to establish a code for the Church in his Charge to the  Clergy (1794). He also tried to regain control over the appointment  of East India Company chaplains because of 'the importance of  religion in our eastern settlements' (Hodgson 1821: i, 146-7). As  a man of colonial origins himself, he worked hard in the cause  of the abolition of the slave trade and the cautious evangelisation  of the West Indian slaves. The method was to be one of godly  demonstration by a revived Anglican hierarchy in the Caribbean  over which the Bishop of London was to have much greater  influence. The Church, which had so far confined itself to  benevolent inactivity and distant encouragement of Moravian  and other continental Protestant missionaries, was now to be more  active. The civilisation and conver.sion of the 'negroes in the British  West Indian Islands' should begin with the Church's own trust  estates. Enlightened planters instructed by the king through the  Colonial Office would then initiate a scheme for the promotion of  Christianity among their own slaves. The newly-founded Anglican  Church Missionary Society would work cautiously and slowly in the  areas of British influence.
 The tone of Porteus's activities was typical of the establishment  version of the new Church militant. Like more radical Anglican  evangelicals of the Wilberforce connection and the luminaries  of the dissenting London Missionary Societies (founded 1795),  Porteus believed that the 'providential' destiny of the British  nation had been amply proved by the events of the French Wars.  As his intellectual successor, Claudius Buchanan, Chaplain to the  East India Company, put it, 'Great Britain unquestionably holds the place now which Rome formerly held, in regard to the power  and means of promoting Christian knowledge.' Why else indeed  should providence have saved Great Britain from the 'general wreck  of nations'? (Buchanan 1813: 11) Yet zeal was restrained by prudence. The great aim was to  strengthen the Christian witness of British citizens, particularly  those abroad, along with slaves and servants directly in their charge.  A secondary aim was to convert to Protestantism, Catholics, Syrian  and eastern Orthodox Christians or any of those who could be held  to have already been exposed to God's Word but in a perverted form.  The direct evangelisation of free, heathen peoples was another  matter. Many establishment evangelicals believed that education  and enlightenment must precede evangelisation and that Christian  demonstrations of godliness were more appropriate than the direct  assaults on the souls and affections of heathens approved by more  radical evangelicals. Buchanan's Colonial Ecclesiastical Establishments  summed up these views. The aim was to 'extend the national  Church'. There should be 'bishops in each of Great Britain's  principal provinces'; the universities should become active in  language and translation, and Anglican literary establishments  should be founded in all of the main sectors of the globe.  The location of these missions is of interest. The reclamation  of the planters and their charges in the West Indies was of  prime concern. A slow spread of evangelical thought had begun  among Anglicans connected with the West Indies following James  Ramsey's 'An Essay on the Treatment of African Slaves in the British  Sugar Islands' ( 1786). This argued that Christianity could prevent  'insurrections and murders' and undermine the bases of African  superstitions among the slaves. Buchanan added that 'Mulattos'  were to be saved 'because of their English descent'. The Anglican  establishment was slow to promote societies for more widespread  conversion, but the pressure of abolitionist opinion and periodic  slave revolts had begun to force movement by the early 1820s. In  Africa, Christian witness should be continued among the inhabitants  of Sierra Leone. This colony had been founded for trade . It was  also designed to evangelise the Dark Continent and remove from  the streets of London the thousands of 'negro beggars' who had  been released into them by Lord Mansfield's judgement of 1776,  freeing slaves in England. Commerce, religion and domestic social  control marched hand in hand.
 In Europe and the East, particular attention was to be paid to  Malta and the eastern Mediterranean because here the decay of the Romish Church was very clear; also to the ancient Christian  Churches and to the Jews ( often a target of Christian interest during  periods of providentialist revivalism). In India, Anglo-Indians and  the servants of East India Company officials were ripe for proper  conversion; but so also were the oriental English themselves, only  recently turning away from the dangers of 'brahminisation'.  Buchanan argued that it was particularly important to cement the  bonds with the Anglo-Indian, since if the United States had been  Anglican it would not have revolted against the Crown (Buchanan  1813: 112). Thus Buchanan's ecclesiastical establishments were to  be the frontier posts of a Christian empire.
 For this reason, early Anglican efforts in the East concentrated  on work among existing Christian communities and nominal Chris- tians. In southern and south-western India, attempts were macie to  reconvert Catholic Indian Christians perverted and 'led astray' not  only by Popery but also Hindu superstition. This culminated in the  efforts of John Munro, Resident and later .financial officer of the  Kingdom of Travancore, to seduce the ancient community of St  Thomas Christians from their Monophysite or 'Jacobite' allegiance  into the Anglican fold, a project which involved the Resident's personal intervention in Church matters (Bayly: forthcoming).  These efforts went alongside those of the more radical evangelicals  such as Charles Grant of the India Board of Control who influenced  the Company to send out godly chaplains, encouraged the building  of churches and tried to set a new pious standard of behaviour for  the once wild Company servants. In Ceylon meanwhile, nominal  Christians (those who had been 'converted' by the Dutch Company  in order to qualify for public office) were all provided with copies of  the works of Bishop Porteus with the blessing of the first governors  of the new Crown colony (Hodgson 1821: i, 281).
 Much has been written on the influences of Wilberforce and  the more advanced Anglican evangelicals or of Dissenters on the  moral and educational history of the British empire in the early  nineteenth century. What we have called here the establishment  evangelicals have emerged less clearly. Yet their influence on  the future tone of British imperialism was quite critical. They  had helped convert Anglicanism from the lay conformity of  mid-century into a national and imperial faith, but one which  was directed particularly to British nationals and their immediate  legal descendants by birth (people of mixed race) or by law (slaves).  Empire and national church were henceforth closely connected but  in a much more ambiguous way than was the case with the French  Catholic churches or the Portuguese Padroado (Crown patronage).
 Despite differences over 'colonisation' and the merits of direct  or indirect evangelisation of indigenous peoples, the patriotic and  nationalist tone of missionary work outside the fold of the establish- ment Anglicans was just as striking. In one sense, indeed, the dissent- ing churches, the Church of Scotland and the non-episcopalian  evangelicals became 'nationalised' through their activities in the  colonial mission field, dispelling the stigma of radicalism which  had arisen from their work among the lower classes in Britain. The  efforts of Wilberforce, Grant and their circle significantly increased  public pressure for intervention by Westminster against the colonial  assemblies of the West Indian islands which persistently sought to  frustrate attempts to evangelise the slaves on the ground that this  would increase rather than diminish the danger of slave revolts.  Unrelenting public scrutiny of efforts to suppress the slave trade  in West Africa and to monitor the treatment of slaves in the Cape  Colony set the agenda for Lord Bathurst's expanding bureaucracy  in the Colonial Office. At the same time, Methodist missions to the  South Seas appear to have borrowed their organisational skills from  the Royal Navy and the East India Company (QR: 3, 1809, 25).  Subscriptions were channelled into central holding organisation,  and the importance of settling the Polynesians to 'useful trades'  was emphasised, missionary ships set sail, amidst psalm singing,  under a missionary flag showing 'three doves argent in a purple  field bearing olive branches in their bills'. Methodists and radical  Anglicans also took their 'protestant' crusade to Ireland in the early  years of the nineteenth century. They abandoned an earlier  circumspection and directly attacked the 'Romish superstition' on  the grounds that it held the Irish peasant in thrall and encouraged  popular disaffection against the Crown (Bowen 1971).
 The connection between cultural assimilation within the United  Kingdom and evangelism as an imperial project is equally clear in  Scotland. Scottish Protestants had been sending missions to Gaelic  Catholics since the beginning of the eighteenth century . Towards its  end the influence of English Methodists and evangelicals prompted  a new wave of activity. Great Scottish ladies such as Lady Maxwell,  Lady Glenarchy and the Countess of Leven promoted Sunday Schools and the Edinburgh Tract Society in the 1770s and  1780s (Mathieson 1916: 51 ). Later, John Alexander Haldane,  captain in the East India Company's marine, joined Simeon, a  Cambridge divine, and toured through Fife and the Highlands  in 1796 distributing tracts; in the following year they visited the  west of Scotland founding Sunday Schools. After 1797 the effort  gathered momentum with the distribution of 27,000 tracts in the  Orkneys (ibid.: 63-4).
 Several prominent people in these movements had east or west  India connections, although at this time the dominant Moderates of  the Church of Scotland had little time for Asian missions. William  Carey, a Baptist and one of Bengal's most important missionaries,  was denied help in 1797 (he began work instead in 1800 under the  aegis of Danish missionaries in Serampore, Bengal). However, an  interesting indication of the growing national and imperial consen- sus was the later rapprochement between the once-radical Bengal  missionaries and the Wellesley circle. In 1799 Carey had dropped  the 'teachings of the French' for 'things of greater consequence'  (Potts 1967: 171 ). This paved the way for Carey and his comperes  to become involved with language teaching at Wellesley's new  Fort William College. Meanwhile, the ideology of the Church  of Scotland was itself changing. Many moderate churchmen had  argued in an enlightenment philosophical tradition that secular  learning and 'civilisation' must precede conversion. After 1815,  however, the growth of pietism and the conviction of Britain's  providential mission broke the dam (Mathieson 1916: 272). The  French Revolution had eroded faith in Natural Philosophy, and  Scottish churchmen like their English counterparts began to  emphasise Faith. Nor did they wish to lose out in the explosion  of evangelical activity (Hetherington 1843: 227-8). A great tide of  missionary experience and zeal was unleashed in the East, notably  in Dr Duffs Indian mission. It was now urged that the Hindu soul  could make a quantum leap to Grace through an intuitive grasp of  the meaning of the Gospel. Church of Scotland missionaries were  equally important on the Cape of Good Hope. Their leaning towards  Calvinism made it easier for them to adjust to the inheritance of the  Dutch Reformed Church. Yet their settlements among runaway  slaves and Hottentots played an important part in constructing a  network of specifically British mission stations outside the control of  the Cape Dutch farmers, and at times that of the colonial authorities  themselves.
 Protestant missionary activity, then, was an important aspect of the creation of a British nationalism. Attempts at cultural and  religious assimilation were intended not only to hold out salvation  but also to create a pious and united Protestant empire through  the distribution of tracts or the founding of schools. The stimulus  to these changes in Europe and outside was in large measure fear  of rapid social change. Lower-class sedition, the 'rise and progress  of popular disaffection', inspired attempts to reform the morals of  the London populace, just as Anglican schools in rural Ireland and  Presbyterian Bible centres in the Highlands were an answer to  the problem of the Celtic Catholic peasantry. Even in overseas  settlements, evangelising and the strengthening of the forces  of law and order were often directed not so much towards  indigenous peoples as towards disciplining the European and  Eurasian or Eurafrican underclasses which were developing in the  major imperial centres. The inhabitants of Madras, for instance, had  decided to found a Protestant Orphanage to reclaim the illegitimate  children of European military 'who are thought to number many  thousands' well before large-scale missionary activity got under way  in the Company's territories. The colonial establishment feared  that such people might otherwise become agents of sedition for  the European Catholic or Indian powers. Similar movements were  afoot before the tum of the century in British Cape Town and the  Caribbean islands.
 During these years the state also developed important new tools  for control and intervention in England, but more particularly in  Scotland, Ireland and the colonies. A revivified army, a political  and financial bureaucracy and a series of boards of control. The  state knew more and acted more, whether it was preparing statistics  of occupation in Scotland, revenue in India or slave-holding in the  new World. The disasters of the American War had produced an  interlocking network of parliamentary committees with their own  experts; so administrations also had to know more and be better  prepared.
 The important point here is that popular movements which  arose during the climax of the revolutionary period did not  simply respond to the promptings of elite initiatives; they also limited and formed those policies. The doctrine of political  assimilation of Catholic gentry and merchants advocated by  many of Pitt's followers, and later by Wellesley during his period  as lieutenant-governor, foundered not only because the Crown  and factions in England impeded emancipation, but also because  a broader-based but as yet unorganised peasant nationalism began  to emerge. The Catholic hierarchy itself was drawn willy-nilly into  re-emphasising Catholic pietism and open political activity before  the second decade of the nineteenth century.
 THE PROCONSULAR REGIMES The colonial regimes of the early nineteenth century were broadly  compatible with this society. Rather than being a despotic appendage  to a liberal, free-trading industrial state waiting breathlessly for  domestic and colonial reform, they mirrored and reinforced it in  important respects. Despite the emergence of a more intrusive and  centralising Colonial Office (and the growth of the role of the home  secretary in Irish policy) this empire was only loosely controlled from  the centre. The new Colonial Office, for all its incipient Benthamite  principles, was politically weak, understaffed and obsessed with the  problem of slavery or, more precisely, with the question of how  to make more acceptable at home one particular legal form of  unfreedom in the colonies. Colonial governors and their deputies  had a very free rein on most other issues. Up to 1815 or even  1825, they could cite exigencies of war as an excuse for a personal  and often despotic style of rule. War against the French or against  indigenous opponents of British expansion, Maratha, Burmese,  Sinhalese, Malay or Xhosa, could justify much. The prevailing ethos  of loyalism, royalism and aristocratic military virtue provided them  with charisma, dash and a ready supply of gentlemen, often younger sons of landowners, prepared to operate as their clients in return for  substantial salaries. Fear and loathing of republicanism and disdain  for the non-white, non-Anglo-Saxon, or non-Protestant, reinforced  by the fashionable aristocratic evangelicalism, helped inform their  mentality.
 Although these revivified colonial regimes rooted themselves  in starkly differing societies, they had common features and  comparable results. In general the new viceroys abolished or  eroded the powers of existing representative institutions and tried  to create an official class separated from the lures of commerce or  entanglement with 'native' life. The new official class benefited,  however, from massive salaries and sometimes from patronage in  Crown lands. The existing loose racial hierarchies were purged of  direct and irresponsible violence against slaves (wherever possible),  but defined more subtly through law; indigenous peoples (even  white non-Protestants) were excluded from office. Indigenous and  settler landlords were rewarded as far as possible through the  creation of untrammelled property rights to the detriment of  common rights and shifting tenures, but large concentrations of power were avoided when these were not in the hands of officials.  A 'yeoman' solution was particularly favoured where the Scottish  school of 'moral independency' held sway. Some moves to free  trade were put in train, but monopolies were often maintained  on pragmatic grounds and forms of coercion of labour apart  from abject slavery were vigorously employed. Finally, a subtle  anglicisation and, where possible, anglicanisation was in the air.  Direct proselytisation by missionaries (especially those of lower  class) was frowned upon, .but the English gentlemen and Scottish  public servants tried to inoculate these societies with Church and  the supremacy of law.
 IRELAND AND THE MEDITERRANEAN Naturally, it was in Ireland that the viceregal style of government  came under greatest pressure from the tendency to centralise in  Westminster. Yet the lieutenant-governor, or viceroy, under the  Crown still retained considerable powers. Until 1815 he held the  position of commander-in-chief, and with the growth of British  military and para-military forces in the country between 1816  and 1825, lieutenant-governors were often able to influence the  day-to-day deployment of the coercive power of the state. Until  the 1830s the Irish chief-secretary in London also helped to shield  the lieutenant-governor from interference by the British home  secretary. Several of these still-independent viceroys of the early  nineteenth century attempted to use their authority to cut back  the pretensions of the magnates of the Protestant Ascendancy and  to coax the Catholic gentry and merchant classes into the imperial  project. Wellesley-Pole openly espoused the cause of Catholic  emancipation after 1812; his brother Richard Wellesley married  a Catholic and tried to extend his patronage powers in order to  honour Catholics and exclude extremist Protestant Orangemen  from office (Brynn 1978: 51, 84) . . Trinity College Dublin was  quietly encouraged in its role as an 'imperial academy' and the  officially sponsored St Patrick's Day celebrations and rituals of  the Order of St Patrick were a conscious attempt to nurture a  conservative Irish patriotism within the empire similar to that  which was already paying dividends in Scotland and Wales (Hill  1984).
 Several early governors and senior civil servants on the Cape  had Indian experience, notably Lord Macartney and Sir John  Cradock. The tone of their administrations and the nature of  their concerns was reminiscent of that of Cornwallis's India. The  military element was strong. In 1810 there were 6,500 British troops  on the Cape, more than at Gibraltar or Malta, in addition to the large  para-military force of Dutch and their Hottentot servants which  were at the disposal of rural officers known as field-cornets. Even  though the first British administration ( 1796--1803) worked on the  assumption that the colony would be handed back to the Dutch, they  acted more purposefully than the Dutch Company had done against  both white and black dissidence. The settlers of Graaff Reinet in the  eastern Cape who harboured notions of republican independence  were swiftly brought to book, and jacobinism' was suppressed.  Xhosa incursions against the Cape colony were vigorously repulsed Proconsul.ar Despotisms: the British Emp;,re, c. 1800-40
 The evangelical Christianity of the Anglican establishment and  the Church of Scotland played a role in the formation of this British  order on the Cape, well before non-conformist influences became  stronger in the later 1820s. Since the Khoikoi and slaves were  already formal Christians or dependents of Europeans, there was  none of the reluctance to proselytise evident among officers in Asia.  Caledon in particular was keen to employ mission agencies whether  Dutch or British in the settlement of the expanding frontier. He  wrote to Castlereagh about the efforts of the Moravians: 'By the  exertions of the missionaries, the wandering natives are formed  into ... societies and taught by labour to supply their wants, whilst  the Hottentot soldier, formerly without a feeling of religion knows  the nature of an oath and appreciates its value' (PRO: CO 48/2, 4  Feb. 1808). There was no vigorous attempt to impose Anglicanism  on the Dutch population, and Church of Scotland missionaries  from a related Calvinist background played a prominent part in  British religious efforts. Still, the introduction of Anglican services,  English language, laws and schools created a subtle apex to the  social hierarchy of southern Africa from which the Dutch were, or  felt themselves to be, excluded. This perception of exclusion was of  some importance in stimulating the slow development of separatist  feeling among the Boers of.the interior.
 CANADA, AUSTRALIA AND THE CARIBBEAN Government at the Cape was an example of the classic dilemma  of an early imperial state trying to control the expansion of  'settler capitalism'. It bears comparison with the problems facing  contemporary British governors in western Canada where the fur  and logging economy was racing forward into Indian lands; and was  to have later parallels in Australia and New Zealand. It is only one of  a series of issues common to different parts of the early nineteenth- century empire. Religious conformity was another. By comparison  with the Cape where the Dutch Reformed Church was seen as a  tetchy ally in settlement, or the Mediterranean and Ireland where  Anglican evangelisation was limited by fear of Catholic reponse,  Canada saw a much more vigorous holding operation by English  episcopalians during these years. The Church had been endowed  with lands by the Constitution Act of 1791 and considerable  funds continued to pour in from England until the 1820s. SPG  missionaries taught in new schools which had been established  after 1 790 in the eastern provinces. They also found a base in  institutions such as the King's College of Nova Scotia, chartered  in 1802 and the empire's first university, or King's College of New  Brunswick which received its charter in 1829. The more vigorous  face of Anglicanism here reflected an imminent danger from the  secular United States. It was also an extension of the establishment's conquest of the Scottish Highlands in the previous generation, for  the communities particularly targeted for 'conversion' were Catholic  Highlanders such as those of Antigonish. The British tried to build  up a hereditary landlord and office-holding class to maintain this  Anglican settlement. The policy was supported by rising land prices  and the soaring value of timber resources which were maintained  at an artificially high rate by the huge tariffs levied on Baltic and  other non-British produce, even after the end of the war. On the  other hand, the attempts of governors to limit free constitutions  were less successful in these older colonies where a degree of  local representation had been built into their very foundations .  Sir James Craig as Governor suspended the assembly of Lower  Canada in 1807, but he and his colleagues were faced by a growing  and restive middle class of Francophone and Anglophone lawyers  and merchants.
 The Colonial Office responded vigorously, alarmed by the  precedent of the naval mutiny at Spithead and the Nore in  1796 and the pervasive atmosphere of republican libertarianism.  Lachlan Macquarie, the farmer 's son from Mull, was sent out to  quell the mutiny. He disbanded the NSW Corps and created his  own despotism through his complete control of all state offices.  In Macquarie's 'lairdship' there was nothing other than 'my reign ', 'my government' and 'my laws'. His policy also had a positive side.  He abandoned state tenures and tried to create an Australasian  'yeomanry'. He expanded trade with the Pacific Islands, and  surreptitiously with India. He rigorously controlled grain prices  through the government Commissariat, built Anglican churches  and schools. Macquarie, in fact, unleashed the policy which had  guaranteed the assimilation of the Highlands of Scotland a  generation earlier. His rule reflected not so much a long-term plan  evolved in London as a vigorous response to mutiny on the 'settler  frontier' (Ritchie 1986).
 It will be clear that the political arrangements and policies  operated in all these colonies were not simply examples of British  pragmatism or 'muddling through'. Though never planned from  the centre, they were enforced by similar military despotisms,  informed by similar autocratic ideals, and directed against  widespread and interlinked manifestations of social crisis.
 Yet there was one further general condition which linked the  political system in England with the form of colonial government.  That was the expansion of empire as a form of patronage  in office. Despite the controls introduced in the 1780s, Pitt's Proconsu/,ar Despotisms: the British Empire, c. 1800-40
 Different as were the forms of production in the Caribbean,  similar processes of social involution could be seen at work here also.  Ironically, the ending of the slave trade had the effect of curtailing  the movement of slaves into free society. The rising value of slaves  on the market and the inclination of the white owners acted against  manumission. And in conditions of depression in the plantation  sector during the 1820s, few black slaves could buy their own  freedom (Smith 1965: 101 ). The limited changes in the status of free  blacks and coloureds introduced by the autocratic governors and  other metropolitan influences had subtly increased the gradations  of rank within non-white society. White society had also changed.  One observer noted that in the 1780s 'the only distinction of ranks  consisted in white, coloured and negro persons' and blacksmiths  could be found at the white balls. But now 'there is a sufficient  number of secondary rank among the white people to form a society  among themselves', and one which mirrored the social order of the  motherland (Carmichael 1833: I, 18). The influence of Methodism  and revived Anglicanism along with the closer communications with  London had encouraged this involution of social rank. As ownership  of the plantations became less profitable, slave ownership and social rank became values in themselves, so that the effect of 'reform' and  metropolitan influence was to reinforce the caste-like nature of the  colonial society, not to undermine it.
 Most important of all, resistance in England to Catholic political  emancipation until 1829 wasted the political capital which had  been generated by Pitt's policy of political assimilation through  the Union, just as it rendered useless the policies of reconcilation  with Catholic gentry followed by successive viceroys. The imbalance  of political and economic power between Anglo-Irish and Celtic  society became confounded with the religious suspicion between  Protestant and Catholic. The lines were not yet hard drawn, but  in Daniel O'Connell's movement for emancipation and against the  Union, all the elements of Catholicism, gentry patriotism and rural  defence against the outside were coming together . The abolition  of anti-Catholic penal laws in 1829 was seen as a victory for mass  agitation and an acknowledgement of the ability of the Catholic  majority to make Ireland ungovernable if their aspirations were  thwarted. Since it was wrested from Britain and the Protestant Ascendancy by threat, rather than a concession made in the spirit of  reason and justice, it was bound to throw doubt on the future of the  Union itself. By the mid-1830s, the Young Ireland movement had  begun to sow the seeds of a revolutionary Catholic republicanism. So  it was the naked incompleteness of Pitt's policy of assimilation which  presaged its failure from the beginning (Beckett 1981: 304-5) .
 It has been useful to caricature the liberal Anglican view (as  Ronald Robinson calls it), and its unlikely bedfellows, Robinson  and Gallagher, because myths, after all, are part-truths. For much of  imperial history including, as we have seen, much of the eighteenth  century, colonial policy was indeed reactive and pragmatic, seeking  to pre-empt rather than to colonise and, above all, to save money.
 This book has traced some of the institutions and ideologies  which flourished in Pitt's Britain and were then modified and  exported to the new empire. These ideologies and institutions  were, of course, buckled and compromised by the conditions of  the societies into which they were introduced. But even if the  consequences of their introduction were often unintended, the  impulse cannot be ignored, for they affected not only Europeans  overseas, but also the particular histories of African, Asian and  American societies. 'Economical reform' of corrupt government  reinforced the financial basis of the state in Great Britain and  Ireland; its parallel in Asia and Africa was the creation of a new  administrative corps d'elite separated from European tradesmen  and 'native depravity'. 'Agrarian patriotism' and its paraphernalia  of statistical surveys and improving landlords was exported both in its English and Scottish form to the colonies where it had great  influence even though buckled by the pressur~s of indigenous  social change. 'Anti-slavery' and the missionary projects of both  the Anglican and Scottish Churches embraced attempts to discipline  and settle which were formative influences on colonial societies even  though direct proselytisation and assimilation were much less overt  than in the case of the Catholic powers.
 J:.ondon.  Hewat, E., 1960. Vision and Achievement, 1796-1856. A History of the Foreign Missions of the Churches united in the Church of Scotland.  London.
 Innes, J., 1987. 'Jonathan Clark, Social History and England's  Ancien Regime', Past and Present, 115.
 Cambridge.  Norman, E., 1976. Church and Society in England, 1770-1970.
 War of Independence , 82, 89, 95-6  Amerindians , 219  Anglican Church , 137-44 , 179, 206-7, 222  in Ireland, 87, 124  see also Church of England Anglican Universities of Canada, 6  Angola, 92  Antilles, Islands, 90  Anzahs, 43  Arabi, Colonel, 114  Arabia, 20, 34, 36, 43, 44  Arabic as lingua franca , 20  Arcot, 53, 106, 253
 Porteus, Beilby, Bishop of London,  114, 133, 139-40, 143
 Potgeiter, A. H., 244  Poyning's Law (1494), 88  Presbyterian Protestantism, 82  Prince Regent, 110  Prophet, the, see Muhammad  Protestant Ascendancy, 5, 6, 12  Protestant Society in Scotland for the  Propagation of Christian Knowledge, 123  Prussia, 3, 130  Punjab, 25,33,228,229,234,235,239  Pyramids, Battle of, 58, 170  Pyrenees, 4
 Gordon, who was inspired by the plight of the poor and the politics  of resistance that informed the religious revivals among the peasantry,  was baptized into the Native Baptist Church in 1861 after leaving the  Established Church and building the Tabernacle, his own Native Baptist  church in which Paul Bogle would act as a deacon, in kingston.134 Eyre’s  antipathy towards Gordon was based not only in political antagonism  but also in religious difference, insofar as Eyre’s devout Anglican beliefs,  which promoted a bourgeois morality that conflicted with those of reli- gious dissenters, was at odds with Gordon’s more liberationist vision.135
 46.  Underhill helped coalesce Baptist missionaries’ resistance to the colonial  government through a public letter written to the Secretary of the State  for the Colonies, highlighting the economic and political distress of the  black population in Jamaica. See Heuman, Killing Time.
 Africa, 56, 76, 80, 91, 96, 109, 113 Afro-Creole religion, 74, 81 Agamben, Giorgio, 4, 25, 26, 29 Agent, 6, 8, 24, 97, 101, 104, 123, 164, 165, 182, 183, 222 Agrarian secret society, 153 All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC), 71 Anand, Mulk Raj, 5, 45, 46, 48, 49, 51–54, 57, 58 Anti-colonial anti-colonial nationalism, 49, 116,  186
 L Laboring subject, 2, 3, 5, 36, 44–46, 51, 54, 58, 73, 76, 147, 213,  215, 232
 Reform, 3, 7, 12, 33, 42, 57, 117,  121, 153, 156, 157, 168, 214
 Revolting body, 15, 87, 117, 148,  215, 217
 The abolitionist debate –  spearheaded, in some cases, by those with med- ical training –  managed to place the medical care of slaves near the forefront of public concern. As a measure of this, one might note that in 1789, the Privy Council Committee systematically asked witnesses about the care of slaves in sickness, the laws that existed to regulate such care, and the provision for slaves when they were old and infi rm.  80   Colonial legislatures acted to place such laws on the books from the 1780s onwards. Yet much of the attention in the colonies had been reactive. Tracts about such medical care for the enslaved tended to dissipate after Wilberforce’s bill –  delayed until 1791 –  sputtered in the House, the country’s political mood swinging against radical reform in the aftermath of the French Revolution. In 1792 all Wilberforce was able to extract from his fellow parliamentarians was the agreement on a ‘gradual abolition’ of 76      Ibid ., 75– 6.
 Political reform at the highest level was carried out in the context of tremendous public debate about imperial questions. As Catherine Hall has shown, the years leading up to the passage of the Great Reform Act, which did away with ‘‘rotten’’ boroughs and expanded the electorate by approx- imately 60 percent across the United Kingdom in 1832, were preceded by elaborate discussions of citizenship in a variety of ‘‘colonial’’ contexts.≥ Ireland was one. Although Britons did not typically use the word ‘‘colony’’ for Ireland at the time, in Hall’s view it was a colony ‘‘in that Irish Catholics in Ireland were treated as a conquered people and English Protestants in Ireland acted as colonial settlers.’’∂ Religious di√erence carried with it overtones of racial di√erence, and Irish Catholics were politically disen- franchised as well as culturally subordinated. Daniel O’Connell’s work with the Catholic Association, and especially his speeches to Parliament, placed civil rights for the Catholic Irish at the heart of political debate and made it clear that the peace and stability of the whole of the United Kingdom was in peril if political emancipation at the periphery closest in was not forthcoming. Unrest in Upper and Lower Canada in this period added to the sense that the empire was in crisis.∑ Jamaica was another very visible colonial context in which debates about political reform occurred in the 1830s. Parliament was preoccupied with events in Jamaica in the two years leading up to the passage of the Reform Act of 1832, especially in the wake of the Christmas rebellion in December 1831, in which free black men and women sought to overthrow slavery and were brutally repressed.∏ As in Ireland, the language of civil rights and the threat to private property in Jamaica set the stage for a quite conservative Reform Bill in 1832, one that en- franchised about 400,000 men in the United Kingdom but that left the ma- jority of British men and all British women without the parliamentary vote.
 As yet, little is known about the quality of their family experiences and much remains to be discovered about the patterns of family life over  Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG), London, Revd Francis Le Jau to the SPG, 15 Sept. 1708, A4/125.
 Christianity spread among slaves in the British Caribbean from the end of the eighteenth century. But for many decades its impact was limited. The Church of England did not promote a proselytizing role in the West Indian colonies and many African slaves clung to their beliefs such as Obeah and Myal. There were exceptions to the poor penetration of the Anglican Church in the British Caribbean, however. The major one lay in the educational work and preaching undertaken on the Codrington plantations in Barbados by the SPG. This left a durable legacy in the form of Codrington College, established on the island and still flourishing today. But it was the work of nonconformist missionaries that played a greater role in spreading the Christian gospels to slaves. The Moravians were active in missions in Jamaica from 1754 and in a few other islands. The great phase of expansion of missionary activity came after the end of the Napoleonic Wars, when the Baptists, Congregationists, and Methodists rapidly expanded their presence in the Caribbean. By the time of slave emancipation, for example, there were fourteen Wesleyan missions, twelve Baptist, nine Moravian, and six Presbyterian missions in Jamaica. All but four had been established in and after 1815.
 Nonconformist missionaries were guided by their parent societies in Britain. In an age of frequent bickering between nonconformist denominations at home, and between Anglicans and Dissenters, it is unsurprising to find that a sectarian element embedded itself in the mis- sionaries’ preaching. Dissenting missionaries played an important role, however, in spreading literacy and Christian moral instruction among British Caribbean slaves. They linked up with the non-denominational British and Foreign School Society, with its Lancasterian monitorial principles, and with the Mico Charity, originally a way of aiding the victims of Barbary piracy, to spread the teaching of the three R’s in mission schools. Attempts by missionaries to absorb the slaves’ spiritual customs stemming from their ancestors were not always successful, but myalism took over some Christian practices such as the practice of baptism by full immersion in water that was favoured by the Baptists. In the years after the end of slavery parts of Christianity and African religious beliefs combined to form a set of hybrid cultural beliefs in the British West Indies, but the fusion was never full enough to overcome the social and racial gulf between blacks and Europeans in the tropics.
 Various Ladies’ Anti-Slavery Associations were formed, in which middle-class women used their energy and spare time to distribute leaflets, cajole people to sign petitions, and publicize antislavery meet- ings. The first British women’s antislavery society was formed by Lucy Townsend in Birmingham. Such associations could be found in Glas- gow, Bristol, Sheffield, Manchester, and other cities—not just in the main ports associated with the slave trade. They provided an important outlet for political participation by women at a time when they were excluded from Parliament and public office and were not allowed to be members of national organizations or sign petitions (though they could contribute funds). They drew heavily on nonconformist congregations, in which women had always been prominent in numbers and leadership. The local women’s antislavery society in Sheffield, consisting of eighty members in 1825, was just one of several groups that actively propagated the abolitionist message in urban areas. Abolitionist leaders recognized the important contribution made by female efforts in the antislavery cause. The funds raised by women’s antislavery societies were reported in the pages of the Anti-Slavery Reporter.
 NONCONFORMISTS AND ABOLITIONISTS Stronger links were forged between nonconformist groups and abolition- ists in the late 1820s. But the support varied according to denomination. The Quakers and Unitarians, both relatively small in numbers, made less of an impact on this phase of abolitionism, the Quakers because they had long lost the leadership of a Benezet or a Woolman and the Unitarians because they were more disposed to see the amelioration of slavery rather than its demise. The Baptists, Congregationalists, and the Methodists were more prominent in the antislavery campaigns in the final years of British slavery. Scottish Presbyterians also played their part, though to a lesser extent. The Methodists, in particular, were vir- tually unanimous in their condemnation of slavery on moral grounds: over 229,000 Methodists signed antislavery petitions presented to Par- liament in 1833 when total Methodist membership was just under 233,000 people.
 The Baptists, Methodists, and Congregationalists believed in the efficacy of missionary endeavour among slaves; though they admonished missionaries to teach slaves to be obedient to masters, the blacks often used the Christian principles they imbibed to underpin their right to resist tyranny. Missionaries were active in virtually all the Caribbean islands by this time. They were mainly Wesleyan Methodists but included a fair number of Baptists, Congregationalists, and Moravians. In Jamaica, for example, the earliest mission stations were Moravian establishments of 1754 at Carmel and 1760 at Mesopotamia plantation. Another mission station did not appear in the island until 1790, when the Wesleyans arrived at Kingston. Between 1802 and 1834 another fourteen Wesleyan Methodist missions were established in Jamaica along with eleven Baptist, eight Moravian, and six Presbyterian missions. The missionary presence spread to the Cape Colony, where there were six Moravian mission stations by 1834.
 The missionaries’ presence and their pastoral and evangelical work among the slaves filled a gap left by the relative indifference of the established church and its representatives to the plight of blacks in bondage. While it is true that the Anglican church established bishoprics in Jamaica and Barbados in the aftermath of the Demerara rebellion, the Church establishment looked down upon much missionary activity as smacking of ‘enthusiasm’. Dissenting missionaries and abolitionists, however, were imbued with a firm sense that God’s Providence upheld the moral order in the world. In order to achieve Salvation, redemption was necessary and this could only be achieved, as far as slavery was concerned, by the destruction of physical bondage.
 The political atmosphere changed markedly in the two years from 1828 to 1830, however, as Tory administrations experienced leadership problems and faced public clamour for the reform of institutions long untouched that could no longer avoid change. Pressure placed on parliament in those two years led to severe cracks in England’s ‘ancien régime’. In 1828 the Test and Corporation Acts were repealed. Enacted as two pieces of separate legislation under Charles II, they had effectively excluded dissenters and Catholics from attending universities, becoming members of Parliament, and holding other public offices. This was followed by Catholic Emancipation in 1829, which gave Roman Catholics, including those in Ireland, the right to the franchise and to take up their seats in Parliament and hold public office. In less than two years, therefore, two pillars of the entrenched political system had been swept away. These changes split the Tory Party severely. The diehards thought this was the beginning of the break-up of the British Constitution, with the indissoluble bond between the State and the Church of England ruptured. The Liberal Tories regarded the situation as one in which, backs to the wall, concessions were necessary to forestall further major political change. The disarray of the Tories, their defeat at the general election in 1830, and the arrival of a Whig government for the first time in half a century gave great impetus and hope for two further reforms—the reform of Parliament, something not dealt with seriously for centuries, and the campaign to emancipate slaves in the British Empire.
 The credit for achieving slave emancipation in the British Empire must be given to the continued pressure of the abolitionists inside and outside Parliament; to the greater involvement of nonconformist groups in a moral and humanitarian struggle; to the good fortune of a sea change in the political climate after the Tory Party fell into disarray in the late 1820s; to the election of a Whig government determined to legislate on slave emancipation; to the effective work of the Agency Committee lecturers; and to the role played by missionaries and slaves in the Caribbean, notably in the Jamaican slave revolt in 1831, in demonstrating the urgency of the need for slave emancipation. These various facets of the antislavery movement coalesced in the five years after c.1828 to produce the momentum necessary for the rapid demise of slavery in the Caribbean.
 When it comes to Greece, he argued that all Greek colonies were created from scattered and various populations and not from a single stock. He referred to the case of Thurii, a colony of the fifth century BCE, in this respect: if the Thurians could not decide who their founder was, then one can imagine how things were in earlier colonies, and why we have so many different reports concerning the founders of colonies (oikists).77 He referred to Bryant's Analysis of ancient  mythology78 to support his argument that Ionia was not colonized from Athens.79
 (67) Church and Brodribb (1886: xx); cf. Davis (1892) on the ‘quiet confidence’  of Agricola's speech.
 colonial knowledge  65 colonies  30, 31, 42–52 colonization  148
 What happened in the secular world was replicated—indeed even more significantly and irreversibly so—in the world of ecclesiastical politics. It was among churchmen, as we shall see, that the ideas of an all-Britain, indeed an all-British Isles, unit of authority were most fondly cherished in the early twelfth century.25 It was in this sphere that they were now both ideologically and organizationally challenged. Canterbury’s pretensions to primatial author- ity over Ireland were finally scuppered at the synod of Kells in 1152 with the establishment of four archbishoprics in Ireland; plans, already being pro- moted in the 1120s, for metropolitan status for St Andrews over the Scottish Church did not meet with success but the papacy increasingly treated Scotland as an autonomous ecclesiastical unit (a position which was eventually and very 23 See, most recently, David Crouch, ‘The March and the Welsh Kings’, and Geoffrey Barrow, ‘The Scots and the North of England’, in The Anarchy of King Stephen’s Reign, ed. Edmund King (Oxford, 1994), 255–89, 231–53; Geoffrey Barrow, ‘The Kings of Scotland and Durham’, in Anglo-Norman Durham 1093–1193, ed. D. Rollason, M. Harvey, and M. Prestwich (Woodbridge, 1994), 311–23; K. J. Stringer, ‘North-East England and Scotland in the Middle Ages’, Innes Review 44 (1993), 88–99; idem, ‘State-Building in Twelfth-Century Britain: David I, King of Scots and Northern England’, in Government, Religion and Society in Northern England 1000–1700 (Gloucester, 1997), 40–62; Ian Blanchard, ‘Lothian and Beyond: the Economy of the “English empire” of David I’ in Progress and Problems in Medieval England. Essays in Honour of Edward Miller (Cambridge, 1996), 23–46.
 who indulge in such auctions can hardly be said to place the overlordship of the British Isles high on their agenda.
 A single Britain was more than a political aspiration; it was also an ecclesi- astical dream. Indeed in the late eleventh and early twelfth century, it was churchmen above all who kept the idea alive and for their own purposes. It was after all an idea with an apostolic lineage to it. From the earliest cor- respondence of Pope Gregory the Great and St Augustine of Canterbury, the unit which was, at least theoretically, the object of salvation and ecclesiastical organization was Britain. Indeed what else could one call it? So it was that 20 English Historical Documents, c.500–1042, ed. D. Whitelock (2nd edn, 1979), 548–9, 560, 563; Eric John, Orbis Britanniae and Other Studies (Leicester, 1966), esp. ch. 1; Henry Loyn, Society and Peoples. Studies in the History of England and Wales, c.600–1200 (1992), ch. 21; B. Yorke, ‘The Vocabulary of Anglo-Saxon Overlordship’, Anglo-Saxon Studies in Archaeology and History 2 (1981), 171–200.
 Augustine was given the designation ‘archbishop of the Britains’, and one of his most distinguished successors, Theodore, that of ‘archbishop of the island of Britain and the see of Canterbury’.23 And so the examples could be multi- plied. What is more, those examples and the Ecclesiastical History of Bede— with its clear yearning for a single and orthodox Church of Britain—were assiduously studied at Canterbury in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Such texts and such titles were now deployed in order to bolster Canterbury’s claim to primacy over York and to metropolitan power over the whole of Britain and indeed Ireland also. For about eighty years after 1070 the Norman arch- bishops of Canterbury showed remarkable, if spasmodic, tenacity in the pursuit of such claims. Lanfranc, Anselm, and their successors recurrently flaunted titles such as ‘primate of the whole of Britain’; their spokesmen, such as Eadmer and John of Salisbury, frequently referred to Canterbury as ‘the mother of Britain’ or ‘the first see of Britain’. Just in case there was any ambiguity as to the meaning of that phrase, it was specifically spelt out by Archbishop Anselm: ‘primate of the whole of England, Scotland, Ireland and the adjacent isles’.24 Men of the mind are always more likely to be seduced by such grand abstractions than men of muscle. But even ecclesiastics were shrewd enough to realize that their ambitions might find even more favour if they could be supported by arguments of political expediency. And so they were. ‘It would be expedient for the solidarity of the kingdom,’ so Archbishop Lanfranc is alleged to have argued, ‘that all Britain should be subject to one primate.’ In short, Britain should have one king and one archbishop.25
 Such ambitions were shattered in the twelfth century. Canterbury’s hopes for primacy over the British Isles were denied it by the papacy, first by the establishment of four archbishoprics for Ireland and later by taking the Scot- tish Church directly under its own wing. It was left merely with Wales, and even there its hold was recurrently challenged. The ‘mother of Britain’ had 23 Bede, II, c. 3–4; IV, c. 17. 24 From many examples one might cite the following: Councils and Synods, ed. D. Whitelock, M. Brett, and C. N. L. Brooke (Oxford, 1981), II, 619; The Letters of Lanfranc, ed. H. Clover and M. T. Gibson (Oxford, 1979), 50–1; Margaret Gibson, Lanfranc (Oxford, 1978), 121; Eadmer, Historia Novorum in Anglia, ed. M. Rule (R.S., 1884), 26, 42, 189; Hugh the Chantor, The History of the Church of York 1066–1127, ed. C. Johnson (1961), 7, 126–7; John of Salisbury, Letters, ed. W. J. Millor et al., 2 vols. (1955–79), II, 466, 499; Episcopal Acts re Welsh Dioceses, ed. J. Conway Davies, I, 240 (D.38). It is interesting to note how Bede’s phrase ‘all of the church of the English’ (IV, c. 2) was transmuted by Eadmer into ‘all the bishops of Britain’ (Historia Novorum, 282). For a full discussion of Canterbury’s claims, see M. T. Flanagan, Irish Society (as cited above, Ch. 1, n. 17), ch. 1. Simultaneously the archbishops of York were claiming that all the bishoprics of Scotland were their suffragans, in accordance with Gregory the Great’s grand plan for the ecclesiastical organization of Britain: Regesta Regum Scottorum, I, The Acts of Malcolm IV, ed. G. W. S. Barrow (Edinburgh, 1960), 16–17.
 terms of ecclesiastical organization, were eventually forced to readjust their ambitions. It was partly that the language of ecclesiastical pretension could not indefinitely remain out of alignment with the terminology of state power: even Eadmer, vigorous defender of Canterbury’s pan-British claims that he was, referred to his lord of Canterbury as ‘archbishop of the English’ and to ‘the whole church as it is constituted in England’.68 And an English church, with a Welsh appendage, is what it became in the twelfth century, as Canterbury was denied the last vestiges of its theoretical claim to supremacy over Scotland and Ireland.69 The Church of the Britains had contracted into the ecclesia anglicana, and it was the liberties of that Church that King John guaranteed in the opening clause of Magna Carta.
 so it was likewise that the remarkable school of historians of the early twelfth century—notably William of Malmesbury and Henry of Huntingdon— constructed their histories around the theme of the unification of England and arranged their chronologies around the reigns of its kings—as have their successors ever since;13 so it was again that characters as different as Geoffrey of Monmouth and Gerald of Wales advocated unitary rule as the only road to political salvation, and disunity and civil war as an inevitable prelude to chaos.14 In its essence this paradigm of the good political life was increasingly shared by the political classes of the Scottish kingdom or at least of southern and eastern Scotland. There likewise a unitary kingship, the creation and acceptance of a large and stable unit of political authority, the introduction of the English-type shire as the unit of governance, and the claims of a ‘common law’ of Scotland brought much of Scotland—for all its differences in institu- tional forms and practice—increasingly closer into alignment with the polit- ical culture of England. Ralph Pipard could have travelled into lowland Scotland without undue fear of finding himself in a totally alien political environment.
 Apart from mastering the skills of wealth accumulation, there was another stumbling-block which the Welsh would have to overcome if they were to qualify for membership of the English state, that of learning the arts of what Edmund Spenser called ‘sweet civility ’. Bishop William Barlow of St David’s (1536–48) took a rather more generous view of Welsh potential in this respect than did Rowland Lee, but even so he had no doubt that a period of cultural and educational re-orientation was necessary. If provision were made, he suggested, ‘for learning as well as in grammar as in other sciences and knowledge of the Scripture, the Welsh rudeness would soon be framed to English civility and their corrupt capacities easily reformed into godly intelligence’ (my italics).4 Barlow’s recipe for civilizing the Welsh was in no way novel. It had, for example, been much more amply laid out by Archbishop John Pecham (1279–92) in the wake of Edward I’s conquest of the country. Indeed, Pecham’s programme had involved not only ecclesiastical and moral reform but also ideological cleansing (to wean the Welsh from their fantasies about descent from the Trojans), economic indoctrination, particularly regarding the virtues of hard work, and deliberate resettlement in towns ( just as the Romans had resettled the Burgundians), so that, in the archbishop’s words, the Welsh could be brought ‘to the knowledge of unity with English lordship and the English people’ (my italics)—a pregnant and suggestive phrase indeed.5
 97 For the town: Liber primus Kilkenniensis, ed. C. MacNeill (Dublin, 1931); for the church: ‘A Worthy Foundation’: The Cathedral Church of St. Canice, Kilkenny 1285–1985, ed. C. A. Empey (Mountrath, 1985); for John Clyn: Chronicle as cited above, n. 44; for Bishop Ledred’s address in English and French: Proceedings against Alice Kyteler . . . 1324, ed. T. Wright (Camden Society, 1843), 15.
 rather than specifically English. The changes in monastic practice and reli- gious organization were often introduced by native rulers independently, and chronologically often well in advance, of English power and domina- tion. This, for example, is pre-eminently true of the impact of the so-called papal reform movement and of the new monastic orders in Ireland, Scotland, Galloway, and in a measure Wales.84 Furthermore, Canterbury’s vision of a single British or indeed British and Irish Church under its ultimate control— an ecclesiastical vision to match the prospect of a single high kingship—was recurrently thwarted during the twelfth century and had been finally dashed before the century was out.85
 85 See above, pp. 11–12. 86 Ireland: Ralph of Diceto, Opera Historica (R.S.), II, 350. Gerald of Wales (Expugnatio Hibernica, 100–1) likewise claimed that one of the decisions of the Council of Cashel (1172) was that ‘in all parts of the Irish church all matters relating to religion are to be conducted hereafter . . . in line with the observances of the English church (anglicana ecclesia).’ This doctrine of eccle- siastical conformity with the English Church was regularly reiterated, e.g. CDI, III, no. 10; Affairs of Ireland before King’s Council, 64–6. Scotland: the ‘treaty’ of Falaise (1174) decreed that ‘the church of Scotland shall henceforward owe such subjection to the church of England as it should do’ (Anglo-Scottish Relations, 5); Duncan, Scotland, 264; Wales: see especially J. Conway Davies, Episcopal Acts re. Welsh Dioceses 1066–1272, esp. 76 et seq.; for very brief summary, Davies, Conquest, 188–91.
 adopted English ecclesiastical custom’—including organization into parishes and the payment of tithes.87 Likewise, the coming of the English to Ireland was accompanied by the further creation of parishes, the requirement to pay tithes, and the aggregation of parishes into rural deaneries.88
 99 For the Church, see above, n. 84; for political changes, sometimes described as ‘the feudal- ization of Irish society’, see NHI, II, 4–13; F. J. Byrne, Irish Kings and High-kings (1973), 269–74 and D. Ó Corráin in Historical Studies 11 (1978), 1–35.
 So was solved, at least terminologically and in English eyes, the question of the relationship of England to Britain, even to the British isles. It was a solution which has done good service ever since. But, of course, it was a 31 Quoted as above, Ch. 1, n. 39. 32 W. Stubbs, Constitutional History of England (1884–8), I, 532, 637. 33 See above, Ch. 2, p. 49 and nn. 56–9.
 Elgin (S) 83, 191; cathedral of 164 England, continuous historical mythology of 1–2, 9, 41–3, 48–9, 52, 94, 97, 196, 200; equated with Britain 49, 202–3; ethnic identity of 196; name of 49, 51, 55; north of 5–6, 10–11, 55, 63–5, 72; shaping of as a country 54–5, 58–9, 61, 63–5, 80, 193–201
 Paisley (S) 164 Pecham, John, archbishop of Canterbury (1279–92) 34, 114, 120, 127, 129, 133, 141
 elites 10, 37, 44, 51–2, 55, 58, 88, 207, 219, 226–7
 Colonies 450
 Anti-colonial lobbying in international bodies, too, was of little  consequence for the end of colonial rule and is traditionally overvalued.65
 propaganda in colonies, 142
 in colonies, 19–21, 50–2
 and constitutional reform in colonies, 5, 206
 see also constitutional reform (in colonies) democratization (in colonies) see constitutional reform (in colonies) ‘detribalization’, notion in British colonial doctrine, 96
 in colonies, 114, 139–43
 elites 10, 37, 44, 51–2, 55, 58, 88, 207, 219, 226–7
 were in place. Similarly, “all landed and commercial transactions were now recognizably English.”50 During the eighteenth century, Ireland had its own parliament, suggesting a degree of autonomy. Yet, as Thomas Bartlett has pointed out, this was not unique to Ireland; at the time, representative institutions also existed elsewhere in the British Empire.51
 2 A “great body corporate” 1857 and the sinews of empire Within hours of receiving a request for assistance from the governor of Bombay, George Grey sprung to action. The Cape Colony governor immediately proposed the transfer of regiments, horses, artillery, and even money to support the British cause in India. In doing so, he claimed to be motivated by a sense of imperial responsibility. In moments of crisis, he explained to the Colonial Office, it was essential that all parts of the empire “simultaneously stir themselves to meet the emergency”; furthermore, he insisted, they needed to do so without first contacting London. The empire, after all, was more than a loose collection of isolated colonies. According to Grey, it was “a great body corporate” and each colony a “useful” member of the whole.1 Although one of the first to assist the British in India in 1857, Grey was not the only colonial administrator to do so; nor was he the only Briton to recognize the potential strength of a unified empire in which different colonies supported each other during moments of crisis. Throughout the empire, colonial officials and settlers scrambled to provide assistance for their kinsmen overseas.
 While press networks provided a crucial means of spreading news of the rebellion, other colonial connections often shaped reception. In par- ticular, familial connections ensured that the news reports would be read with interest throughout the empire. In 1857, it was not unusual for impe- rial participation to be a family affair. Many of the individuals famously associated with the suppression of the uprising – John Lawrence, Henry Havelock, and Frederick Sleigh Roberts – came from families with long military traditions. Some even had family members who were also serving in India in 1857 or stationed elsewhere in the empire. John Lawrence had two brothers, Henry and George, who were also noted for holding key military positions in India during the uprising. Similarly, the Graham family, originally from Ulster, had five family members in India when the rebellion began. These families of the empire were not restricted to the military; similar stories emerged within the empire’s missionary enterprise and among other colonists.
 The colonies respond The same connections that shaped individual reactions to the uprising also conditioned official and collective responses. Initially, colonial offi- cials and settlers relied heavily on imperial networks to generate support for the British project in India, and many scrambled to provide assis- tance. This flurry of support, however, quickly gave way to concerns. With time, and as the situation in India worsened, many in the colonies raised questions regarding colonial obligations. The following sections will examine these more formal contributions to British efforts overseas and the resulting questions regarding colonial responsibility and imperial unity.
 In preparation, the bishop circulated prayers to be included in service on three consecutive Sundays. Furthermore, he suggested to his fellow members of the clergy that they provide their congregations with “some brief explanation of what has been peculiar in the service for the day.” He warned, however, that the explanation should not be mistaken for an opportunity to dwell on the violence in India; when it came to “those 70 Dublin Evening Mail, October 7, 1857. Although many Protestants observed the day, some Irish nationalists mocked it. The Nation, for example, noted that the day of humiliation was “rather unnecessary” as the British had already experienced months of “humiliation” at the hands of the Indian sepoys. See Nation, October 3, 1857.
 When news of the uprising reached the colonies, the response was varied. Many individuals and colonial bodies responded immediately with offers of assistance. Others recommended transporting disbanded sepoys and suspected mutineers to new colonial locations. In each of these exam- ples, colonial officials and settlers debated both the colonial and imperial impact. Indeed, support for British efforts in India was rarely offered unconditionally; relief did not come without questions, debate, or even stipulations. When providing spiritual, military, or economic relief, indi- viduals and colonial bodies wanted recognition for their efforts. Further- more, many wanted assurance that the potential promise and strength of the “great body corporate” would also be there to assist them in their hour of need.
 While the idea that the Indian rebellion might represent the begin- ning of the end for the British appeared plausible in Ireland, it is more difficult to trace in other regions of the empire. Certainly, the empire witnessed an increasing number of indigenous and pan-tribal organi- zations, often developed as resistance measures against the British. In 1858, for example, Maori chiefs unified under the King Movement and selected the aged and hesitant warrior Potatau te Wherowhero as the Maori king.92 According to James Belich, the King Movement rep- resented an “unprecedented” show of pan-tribalism.93 Although the movement did not include all of Maoridom, it was an option for all Maori to join. This “very embryonic and incomplete sense of col- lective identity” can be traced in part to “a vague sense of shared unEuropeaness.”94 It cannot, however, be traced to the 1857 Indian rebellion. The King Movement had been taking shape throughout the 1850s and was proposed prior to the uprising in India. Even after the Indi- ans rebelled, I have found no direct evidence that the King Movement or any Maori unrest drew inspiration from the Indians or anyone else overseas.
 Furthermore, members of the press in New Zealand drew distinctions between colonized peoples and wrestled with efforts to “divide and rule,” mix regiments, and create a defense policy that both involved colonial people and reinforced British control. As in 1857, a number of different colonized people and possible solutions came under review. Although Wilson placed his faith in the Gurkhas, not everyone agreed that the Nepalese soldiers presented the best option. Major General H. Troup, one of Wilson’s most vocal opponents, had long advocated the use of Sikh troops. According to Troup, the Gurkhas were expensive, inferior soldiers, and prone to mutiny. The Sikhs, on the other hand, had “few prejudices, either religious or social,” and, “if properly treated,” could be “easily managed.” As a result, a Sikh would prove to be the better “man” and could benefit the colony as “either as a soldier or agriculturist.”73
 Similar calls for decisive action emerged elsewhere in the empire, and not just among people in positions of military or administrative power. Members of the armed services, the clergy, the colonial press, and indi- vidual colonists all pointed to the violence of 1857 as a legitimate reason to dispel potential unrest. As early as 1859, having received word of nationalist efforts in Belfast, James Graham wrote to his sister in Ire- land, “I cannot make out what your Belfast Phoenix Club people want; a landing of the American in Ireland to assist them in getting what!” While Graham seemed confused by the movement, he did not hesitate to suggest a response. “They ought to be put down with a strong arm. Give them [the authorities] a special commission as they did formerly, and hang not only all concerned but everyone that harbours them. They will then have met the just reward of their ingratitude.”124 Graham suggested that, like the sepoys in India, the nationalists in Ireland had expressed a lack of gratitude for British rule. And, fresh from suppressing the Indian rebellion, he recommended a similar “strong arm” response.
 In the end, colonial officials performed a balancing act. They openly acknowledged and rewarded “loyal” Maori leaders, but embraced force at the first signs of dissent. The Maori representatives remained a part of the colony’s political institutions; in fact, the number of Maori repre- sentatives increased during the early 1870s. As Bowen explained to the Colonial Office, it was “at once more politic and more humane to out- live the King Movement” than to “suppress it by the strong hand.” The colonists, he continued, needed to encourage “the turbulent natives” to “live peaceably.” The strong hand, however, would still come out when- ever necessary. “[M]urderous onslaughts whether on the Europeans or on the friendly Maori,” he explained, “should be punished with the rigour necessary to prevent a recurrence of unprovoked aggressions.”73 Hand in hand, these methods sought the same outcomes: to ensure Maori loy- alty and reinforce British authority. Force provided a means to establish power, and political institutions provided a method to maintain control.
 Salmon, George. The Indian Mutiny and Missions. A sermon, preached on behalf of the Church Missionary Society, on Sunday, September 5, 1857. Dublin: Madden Oldham; London: Weitham and Macintosh, 1862.
 Religion The British Empire also grew through Protestantism. Anti-Catholicism spurred British empire-building and Protestantism shaped the British Atlantic world from the Reformation to the American Revolution. It united the Atlantic world whilst simultaneously sowing religious diversity and fragmentation. The Reformation involved a clash of peoples and beliefs in England, Scotland, Ireland, parts of North and South America, the Caribbean, and Africa, and fuelled colonial expansion as bitter rivalries prompted fierce competition for souls. Despite officially promoting religious homogeneity, the English found it impossible to prevent the conflicts in their homeland from infecting their new colonies. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, a major theme relating to empire, in terms of migration, expansion, and cultural relations, was the growth of powerful missionary societies and humanitarian activism. Most famously this was associated with the abolition of slavery, an endeavour that continued late into the nineteenth century as the desire to defeat, for example, the Arab slave trade, provided a new rallying call for missionary activity and colonial expansion to underwrite it.
 Anglican church 113
 colonies 4–5
 of colonies 10
 missionary societies 89
 ‘model’ colonies 69
 power over colonies 10
 Protestant Reformation 67, 73, 75
 Reformation, Protestant 67, 73, 75
 An additional factor, which enhances network efficiency, is the pres- ence of individuals in the network whose role is to ensure that infor- mation circulates as freely and widely as possible. Such individuals are  in many ways the true architects of social capital. There is no specific  background or training that singles people out for this role. They can be  politicians, bureaucrats, entrepreneurs, professionals, spiritual teachers  or just highly motivated individuals. Yet, whatever their origins, their  work, if embedded within a conducive institutional environment, can  be pivotal in making networks work well. Crucial to the functioning  of medieval fairs of Champagne, for example, were the private judges  that operated under the Law Merchant. According to Paul Milgrom,  Douglass North and Barry Weingast, one of the duties of these judges  was ‘to transmit just enough information to the right person in the  right circumstances to enable the reputation mechanism to function 34 Glaeser, Laibson and Sacredote, ‘Economic Approach’, p. 13; Bowles and Gintis,  ‘Community Governance’, p. 423.
 53 Bowles and Gintis, ‘Community Governance’, pp. 423–31.
 The Orange Lodge Order – the fraternity at the heart of Ulster  Unionism – was likewise well established in the dominion, where it  functioned as a ‘community-building frontier organisation’.93 Its birth- place was in Ontario among loyalist settlers who were determined to  maintain their religious convictions and defend British institutions, and  who ‘shared a belief in future greatness and progress achieved as an  integral part of the British Empire’.94 There were possibly as many as  100,000 Ontarian Orangemen by the end of the nineteenth century.95  For Irish Protestants in the province Orangeism was a way of life. Its  branches (or lodges) were ‘an avenue of association’, serving to extend  ‘a colonial frame of mind’ among settlers who were becoming increas- ingly aware of the growing threat from the world’s great republic to  the south, and from Catholic, French-speaking Quebec to the east.96  Thus, by the early 1900s, the Order was a social and political force to  be reckoned with.97
 empire was built into the terminology of Orangeism, but in a way that  did not exclude the United States. With regard to the law, language and  other facets of culture, America remained a part, if an ambiguous one,  of the British diaspora. That said, the Order was weaker in the United  States, where, by the later nineteenth century, there were approximately  only 10,000 members belonging to some 350 lodges (6 per cent of the  world’s total), largely confined to the north-east and areas adjacent to  the Canadian border. Unsurprisingly, the American republic did not  warm to an organisation devoted to the maintenance of British constitu- tional and cultural forms. Orangemen living there had to downplay their  monarchist tradition and imperial sympathies, and to look instead to  other ‘nativist’ groups – such as the American Protestant Association – to  defend their religious interests.98
 and internal tensions of African  societies/states, 1, 45–6, 74,  159–60
 The abolitionist debate –  spearheaded, in some cases, by those with med- ical training –  managed to place the medical care of slaves near the forefront of public concern. As a measure of this, one might note that in 1789, the Privy Council Committee systematically asked witnesses about the care of slaves in sickness, the laws that existed to regulate such care, and the provision for slaves when they were old and infi rm.  80   Colonial legislatures acted to place such laws on the books from the 1780s onwards. Yet much of the attention in the colonies had been reactive. Tracts about such medical care for the enslaved tended to dissipate after Wilberforce’s bill –  delayed until 1791 –  sputtered in the House, the country’s political mood swinging against radical reform in the aftermath of the French Revolution. In 1792 all Wilberforce was able to extract from his fellow parliamentarians was the agreement on a ‘gradual abolition’ of 76      Ibid ., 75– 6.
 The point about all of this activity, however, is that the press was part of a wider intellectual ferment, connected in a variety of ways to the establishment of literary and scientific societies, to frontier and ‘native’ policy, to the abolition of slavery, and to missionary endeavour, partic- ularly as personified by yet another Scot, the London Missionary Society superintendent, Dr John Philip. The press, which Somerset made strenuous but failing attempts to suppress, was part of a wider creation of a bourgeois, intellectual and also commercial public sphere. The Scots were motivated not just by the ambition to influence matters of governance, religion and frontier settlement, but also to create banking, insurance and commercial institutions. The press was a vehicle for all these concerns, much influenced by Adam Smith and other figures of the Scottish Enlightenment. By 1853, the efforts of this group (in league with influential Dutch and English allies) culminated in the establishment of representative government at the Cape.
 Somerset and the ‘Scotch Independents’ Three Scottish figures dominated this tempestuous period at the Cape, and the developments of the 1820s can only be understood in terms of their background. The first of these to arrive was Dr John Philip (1775–1851), the highly influential superintendent of the London Missionary Society.8 Philip was the son of a handloom weaver from Fife, and born therefore into a social group that was to be most disadvantaged by the developing industrialism of the period. Well schooled, he worked at a mill in Dundee in the 1790s, an experience which contributed to his sense of social injustice. By 1799 he believed he had a vocation and went to the Congregationalist college at Hoxton to train as a minister. He was duly ordained in the Congregationalist Church, then increasingly powerful in Scotland, and in 1804 became minister of a church in Aberdeen. There he began to display his radical tendencies, his belief in the relationship between religion and politics, and his search for a particular kind of practical and involved evangeli- calism. He was also a powerful and popular preacher, frequently filling a large church to capacity.
 4  ‘The Old Pals’ Protection Society’?  The Colonial Office and the British  Press on the Eve of Decolonisation  Joanna Lewis and Philip Murphy As the 1950s drew to a close, there was a growing awareness on the part of British ministers and officials of the power of the media and the need for ‘news management’. As Harold Macmillan noted in his memoirs, by 1959 he and his colleagues fought elections in the company of two new developments: television and opinion polls.1 Yet there remained a tradition under which civil servants were expected to remain relatively aloof from the world of journalism, and ministers expected a degree of deference from the press. The Colonial Office (CO) in particular was keen to keep its own affairs from the critical scrutiny not only of the media but of Parliament itself, fearing that public disagreements about policy within the metropole would weaken the authority of its personnel in the colonies.2 In this regard the issues of press coverage and parliamentary scrutiny were closely interlinked. Through the mechanism of parliamentary questions, MPs may well have played a more significant role than journalists in holding the Government to account.3 Yet a large proportion of those questions were inspired by reports in the press, and ministerial replies could, in turn, encourage further investigations by the media.
 1. Harold Macmillan, Pointing the Way, 1959–1961 (London: Macmillan, 1972), p. 7.  2. See, for example, the resistance of the CO to the idea of the establishment of a specialist parliamentary committee on colonial affairs because of fears that its activities might ‘exacerbate public opinion in the colonial territories’ (Watt to Smart, 24 September 1958, CO 1032/135).
 Although New Zealand was only ‘a subplot in the diaspora of Europeans that sent as many as 50 million from the Old World to the New’,10 it became a keen and committed part of the Empire. But was the colonial experience weaker and less effective because communications were difficult? We should keep in mind that New Zealand was considered ‘More English than England!’, resulting perhaps from its isolation, so that it clung to ‘the ideas traditionally associated with the Victorian Age which nurtured her in infancy and early youth’, and was ‘untouched by the revolutionary solvents of the twentieth century’.11
 and also would have destabilised the “civilising mission” and Britain’s  moral authority in colonies.145
 An additional factor, which enhances network efficiency, is the pres- ence of individuals in the network whose role is to ensure that infor- mation circulates as freely and widely as possible. Such individuals are  in many ways the true architects of social capital. There is no specific  background or training that singles people out for this role. They can be  politicians, bureaucrats, entrepreneurs, professionals, spiritual teachers  or just highly motivated individuals. Yet, whatever their origins, their  work, if embedded within a conducive institutional environment, can  be pivotal in making networks work well. Crucial to the functioning  of medieval fairs of Champagne, for example, were the private judges  that operated under the Law Merchant. According to Paul Milgrom,  Douglass North and Barry Weingast, one of the duties of these judges  was ‘to transmit just enough information to the right person in the  right circumstances to enable the reputation mechanism to function 34 Glaeser, Laibson and Sacredote, ‘Economic Approach’, p. 13; Bowles and Gintis,  ‘Community Governance’, p. 423.
 53 Bowles and Gintis, ‘Community Governance’, pp. 423–31.
 The Orange Lodge Order – the fraternity at the heart of Ulster  Unionism – was likewise well established in the dominion, where it  functioned as a ‘community-building frontier organisation’.93 Its birth- place was in Ontario among loyalist settlers who were determined to  maintain their religious convictions and defend British institutions, and  who ‘shared a belief in future greatness and progress achieved as an  integral part of the British Empire’.94 There were possibly as many as  100,000 Ontarian Orangemen by the end of the nineteenth century.95  For Irish Protestants in the province Orangeism was a way of life. Its  branches (or lodges) were ‘an avenue of association’, serving to extend  ‘a colonial frame of mind’ among settlers who were becoming increas- ingly aware of the growing threat from the world’s great republic to  the south, and from Catholic, French-speaking Quebec to the east.96  Thus, by the early 1900s, the Order was a social and political force to  be reckoned with.97
 empire was built into the terminology of Orangeism, but in a way that  did not exclude the United States. With regard to the law, language and  other facets of culture, America remained a part, if an ambiguous one,  of the British diaspora. That said, the Order was weaker in the United  States, where, by the later nineteenth century, there were approximately  only 10,000 members belonging to some 350 lodges (6 per cent of the  world’s total), largely confined to the north-east and areas adjacent to  the Canadian border. Unsurprisingly, the American republic did not  warm to an organisation devoted to the maintenance of British constitu- tional and cultural forms. Orangemen living there had to downplay their  monarchist tradition and imperial sympathies, and to look instead to  other ‘nativist’ groups – such as the American Protestant Association – to  defend their religious interests.98
 Other social changes have had important impacts. Church and mis- sion, often unintentionally, provided a route to secular enlightenment. Literacy brought with it a new critical understanding of colonial history. Newfound knowledge and contacts were used to agitate for rights and freedom, and establish independent churches and political parties. Since the 1930s, urbanization and greater mobility offered new opportunities for learning, earning, and networking. Aboriginal soldiers went to fight in two world wars and came back decorated and chastened, wondering about the disparity between how they were treated as equals on foreign battlefields yet as inferiors at home on ‘civvy street’. The rise of aborig- inal print and broadcast media gave this population a public voice; in particular radio, and later electronic media, united far-flung and isolated communities.
 Part 12 Power 42 Persuasion 1805–1842
 The Navy was politically moderate and Elizabethan in its outlook. The army, in contrast, became more radical as the war went on. Charles became parliament’s prisoner in 1647. When parliament tried to come to terms with Charles and disband the army, the troops mutinied and occupied London. The revolt was led by the radical religious and political elements in it, the Independents and Levellers, who were opposed to the moderate views of most MPs. They did not want a settlement with Charles. In 1647 the army radicals demanded universal male suffrage and religious freedom. The army was the most powerful force in the country.
 Being a Catholic in seventeenth-century England was hard enough. Being heir to the throne did not ease things – in fact it exacerbated them. Catholicism was identified as un-English and, above all, tyrannical. The Great Fire of London in 1666 was believed to be the work of an international Catholic conspiracy hell-bent on wrecking the Anglican Church and stamping arbitrary government onto free England. From 1661 Louis XIV (a Catholic of course) aimed to establish Universal Monarchy – or French hegemony – over Europe. In 1677 Titus Oates, a disgraced naval chaplain, told the world of a Catholic conspiracy to assassinate Charles II, an act that would bring James to the throne. It was all fiction, but there followed a wave of hysteria and attempts in parliament to exclude James from the succession. ‘I think,’ said one MP, ‘the sun is not more visible at noon-day, than that the Papists have a design to extirpate our religion . . . we have discovered that their weapons are near our throats, so we shall not acquiesce in anything less than may secure us; that so, if possible, we may not fall into the hands of such bloody, merciless people; which must infallibly be the consequence of having a Popish King.’2
 Herbert was a product of James’s Navy and a beneficiary of James’s patronage; he was notoriously lax in his morals and untroubled by a political or religious conscience; yet he was one of the first to withdraw his support for the regime on the grounds of principle. He was dismissed from his offices and began to talk to other disaffected men. The most important of these was Edward Russell. Like Herbert, Russell had enjoyed James’s support in ascending the ladder of promotion in the Navy and establishing himself at court.
 PART 12: POWER PERSUASION 1805–1842
 * Expletive deleted in original.
 1   England 793–878
 42   Persuasion 1805–1842
 gunnery, reform of, ref1, ref2
 Jamaica: ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7; gunboat missions, ref8
 35. A number of agricultural worthies (including Westcar) together formed the Smithfield Club for the purpose, according to Powell, of “bringing out … the principle of early maturity.” Powell, History of the Smithfield Club, 1.
 Phenotype, 29, 96–98
 vision, many others found religious justifications for planting and plunder.  Many sea dogs envisioned themselves as seaborne crusaders of the Protes- tant Reformation. Being that Drake was the son of a Protestant minister, his  alleged piety and enforced shipboard prayers were a crucial component of his  legend. At the forefront of this crusading spirit were those who did not think  the Tudors had taken the Reformation far enough. This faction believed the  true, pure church should resemble as closely as possible that of Jesus and his  apostles. Puritans, as their detractors called them, wanted to tear down these  false structures that the Pope and his minions had built. Antipopery meant  radical iconoclasm, like smashing stained- glass windows and defacing statues  of the Virgin Mary. Whereas many Puritans focused on cleansing the Anglican  Church from within, others argued that in order to usher in the apocalypse,  they must fight the papists beyond England’s shores.9
 Indies, his basic arguments about sovereignty on land and the sea were par- ticularly popular among militant Protestants like the earl of Warwick and  English colonists.34
 61. Bradford, History of Plimoth Plantation, 527; Warwick to Adam Winthrop, David Yale . . .  Merchants at Boston, Dec. 11, 1646, CO 1/11, no. 9; Dunn, Savage, and Yeandle, eds., Journal of John  Winthrop, 490. Mark A. Peterson has noted that Puritans were eager to obtain treasure because  “religion was expensive.” Maintaining learned ministers (sometimes two in one church), a system  of public education, purchase of books, and the many other expenses to live a godly life could add  up quickly. He argues, “The growth of Puritanism, the continuous nurturing of its inner vitality,  and the spread of orthodox churches across the New England landscape required the material  and cultural resources produced by an expanding commercial economy.” Indeed, “money sown  to the spirit would reap divine rewards” (Peterson, The Price of Redemption: The Spiritual Economy  of Puritan New England [Stanford, Calif., 1997], 2–3). For this reason, John Winthrop’s eldest son,  John Winthrop, Jr., practiced alchemy because its riches could “fund the social amelioration many As tensions emerged at the intersection of local needs, illicit commerce,  godly governance, and imperial administration, Winthrop and other colonial  Puritan leaders attentively followed the dramatic rift between their brethren  and the Stuart crown in England. The English Revolution was the culmination  of persistent challenges to the Stuarts’ repeated attempts to extend their royal  prerogative. The civil law and Admiralty jurisdiction had been under attack  during the early seventeenth century, primarily by jurist Sir Edward Coke.  Coke believed the true source of English law was popular custom, not foreign  codes. He defended the Admiralty’s right to try cases of high seas piracy but  denied it the right to try arguments over the goods taken by pirates and lim- ited the court’s jurisdiction over those on land charged with aiding and abet- ting piracy.62 Although he toed the Anglican party line, Coke sympathized  with Puritans, gradually becoming a leader against Charles I’s attempts to im- pose royal prerogative. His profound faith in the common law relied upon the  power and sanctity of the jury, which took on a greater degree of significance  for Dissenting Protestants during the Civil War. Religious radicals challenged  the legal system as serving the avaricious and corrupt. They denounced the  death penalty for theft and believed judges should be elected. In 1650, Oliver  Cromwell said, “The law as it is now constituted serves only to maintain the  lawyers and to encourage the rich to oppress the poor.” He argued against  judges, since one could “Take a cobbler from his seat, or a butcher from his  shop, or any other tradesman that is an honest and just man, and let him hear  the case.” The leveling tendencies of the 1640s and 1650s manifested in an ap- peal for greater local legal autonomy.63
 The effect of the revolution’s radicalism on maritime regulation was best  exemplified in the little colony of Rhode Island. In 1644, as governor in chief  of the colonies, the earl of Warwick provided Roger Williams the grant for the  Providence Plantations that would become Rhode Island. Williams intended  the colony to serve as a refuge for religious dissenters of all sorts, particu- larly individuals who would not follow the religious orthodoxy of its northern  neighbor. Many associated radical Protestantism with pirates, since both ex- hibited self- determining behavior. Williams called his creation the “banished”  colony, admitting that his “outcast state” was “hated by the other Colonies.”  Among the progenitors in what would become one of the most notorious  English pirate nests were antinomians; their adherents, including Massachu- setts Bay Colony exile Anne Hutchinson, claimed that their personal relation- ship with God raised them not only above ecclesiastical laws but also above  civil laws and governmental structures. As early as 1651, outsiders feared that  “notorius Delinkquents” would soon rule Newport, the “Cittey of Refuge.”65
 Respectable planter Morgan also found religion, only not the militant Puri- tanism that inspired the earl of Warwick. Instead, he found solace in the state  religion, in an attempt to connect more closely to the metropolitan gentry in  London and to appear less peripheral. He helped pay for the construction of  a new Anglican church in Port Royal. Its first sermon was “Published at the  Request of Sir Henry Morgan,” providing the “opportunity of publishing to  the World, how great a Patron of the Orthodox Religion we have in Jamaica.”  Soon after, Morgan had another sermon printed in London that demon- strated the loyalty of the Jamaica elite. Here the minister implored, “Render  therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Caesars,” and, in turn, “Love the  Magistrate.” Good Christians were not “Trumpeters of Sedition” or “Affectors  of Liberty.” Morgan’s party soon showed intolerance. In 1683, his ally, a lawyer  named Elletson, who had allegedly fled to Jamaica “by his crimes and other  necessities,” tried to convince the council to pass a law against Dissenters but  failed. Sir Thomas Lynch opined, “Though [Elletson] would now be thought  episcopal, he was a fanatic.”59
 traders. Whigs argued that monopolies represented absolutism, the royal pre- rogative, and popery.10
 Despite his success in writing a bill that would markedly transform the ad- ministration of the English empire, Randolph had serious reservations. First,  he feared that local colonial authorities would attempt to use their charters  to bar the vice-admiralty courts. Sir John Trevor, the attorney general, initially  rebuffed these fears, maintaining the crown’s right to establish its own courts  in any colony, even private ones. Randolph knew that such a terse dismissal  ignored the long- standing reality of colonial resistance to crown authority.  He warned the House of Lords that private initiative in early colonization  had served its purpose, but now those very same colonies were attempting “to  break loose and set up for themselves.” Governors supported piracy because 15. Steven L. Snell, Courts of Admiralty and the Common Law: Origins of the American Experiment  in Concurrent Jurisdiction (Durham, N.C., 2007), 141–144; Helen J. Crump, Colonial Admiralty  Jurisdiction in the Seventeenth Century, Imperial Studies, no. 5 (London, 1931), 1; 7 & 8 Will. 3, c. 22;  Journal of BOT, Nov. 22–26, 1697, CSP: Col., no. 56, 30–31, esp. 31, William Popple to Sir Charles  Hedges, Whitehall, Nov. 22, 1697, no. 55, 30.
